# Page 1
Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
Biodegradable polymers as biomaterials
Lakshmi S. Naira, Cato T. Laurencina,b,c,
aDepartment of Orthopaedic Surgery, The University of Virginia, VA 22903, USA
bDepartment of Biomedical Engineering, The University of Virginia, VA 22903, USA
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering, The University of Virginia, VA 22903, USA
Received 17 April 2007; received in revised form 23 May 2007; accepted 24 May 2007
Available online 11 June 2007
Abstract
During the past two decades signiﬁcant advances have been made in the development of biodegradable polymeric
materials for biomedical applications. Degradable polymeric biomaterials are preferred candidates for developing
therapeutic devices such as temporary prostheses, three-dimensional porous structures as scaffolds for tissue engineering
and as controlled/sustained release drug delivery vehicles. Each of these applications demands materials with speciﬁc
physical, chemical, biological, biomechanical and degradation properties to provide efﬁcient therapy. Consequently, a
wide range of natural or synthetic polymers capable of undergoing degradation by hydrolytic or enzymatic route are being
investigated for biomedical applications. This review summarizes the main advances published over the last 15 years,
outlining the synthesis, biodegradability and biomedical applications of biodegradable synthetic and natural polymers.
r 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Biodegradable; Polymers; Biomaterials; Hydrolytic degradation; Enzymatic degradation
Contents
1.
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 763
2.
Biodegradable polymers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 764
3.
Hydrolytically degradable polymers as biomaterials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 765
3.1.
Poly(a-esters) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 765
3.1.1.
Polyglycolide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 766
3.1.2.
Polylactides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 768
3.1.3.
Poly(lactide-co-glycolide) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 769
3.1.4.
Polydioxanone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 770
3.1.5.
Polycaprolactone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 770
3.1.6.
Poly(trimethylene carbonate) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 771
3.1.7.
Bacterial polyesters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 771
3.2.
Polyurethanes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 772
ARTICLE IN PRESS
www.elsevier.com/locate/ppolysci
0079-6700/$ - see front matter r 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2007.05.017
Corresponding author. The University of Virginia, 400 Ray C. Hunt Drive, Suite 330, Charlottesville, VA 22903, USA.
Tel.: +1 434 243 0250; fax: +1 434 243 0252.
E-mail address: ctl3f@virginia.edu (C.T. Laurencin).


---

# Page 2
3.3.
Poly(ester amide) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 772
3.4.
Poly(ortho esters) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 772
3.5.
Polyanhydrides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 774
3.6.
Poly(anhydride-co-imide) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 775
3.7.
Cross-linked polyanhydrides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 775
3.8.
Poly(propylene fumarate). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 776
3.9.
Pseudo poly(amino acid) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 776
3.10. Poly(alkyl cyanoacrylates) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 778
3.11. Polyphosphazenes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 778
3.12. Polyphosphoester . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 780
4.
Enzymatically degradable polymers as biomaterials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 781
4.1.
Proteins and Poly(amino acids) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 781
4.1.1.
Collagen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 782
4.1.2.
Natural poly(amino acids). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 783
4.1.3.
Synthetic poly(amino acids). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 784
4.1.4.
Elastin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 786
4.1.5.
Elastin-like peptides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 786
4.1.6.
Albumin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 787
4.1.7.
Fibrin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 787
4.2.
Polysaccharides. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 787
4.2.1.
Polysaccharides of human origin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 787
4.2.2.
Polysaccharides of non-human origin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 789
5.
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 793
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 793
Further reading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 798
1. Introduction
The last two decades of the twentieth century saw
a paradigm shift from biostable biomaterials to
biodegradable
(hydrolytically
and
enzymatically
degradable) biomaterials for medical and related
applications [1–3]. The current trend predicts that in
the next couple of years, many of the permanent
prosthetic devices used for temporary therapeutic
applications will be replaced by biodegradable
devices that could help the body to repair and
regenerate the damaged tissues. There are several
reasons for the favorable consideration of biode-
gradable over biostable materials for biomedical
applications. The major driving force being the
long-term biocompatibility issues with many of the
existing permanent implants and many levels of
ethical and technical issues associated with revision
surgeries.
Even though the biomedical applications of
enzymatically degradable natural polymers such as
collagen dates back thousands of years, the applica-
tion of synthetic biodegradable polymers started
only in the later half of 1960s [4]. However, the past
two decades saw the development of a range of new
generation synthetic biodegradable polymers and
analogous natural polymers speciﬁcally developed
for biomedical applications. The driving force is, in
part, due to the emergence of novel biomedical
technologies including: tissue engineering, regenera-
tive medicine, gene therapy, controlled drug delivery
and bionanotechnology, all of which require biode-
gradable platform materials to build on.
The
slow
evolution
in
the
development
of
biodegradable biomaterials can be attributed to
several unique challenges in developing resorbable
clinical materials compared to developing commod-
ity polymers. A biomaterial can be deﬁned as a
material
intended
to
interface
with
biological
systems to evaluate, treat, augment or replace any
tissue, organ or function of the body [5]. The
essential prerequisite to qualify a material as a
biomaterial is biocompatibility, which is the ability
of a material to perform with an appropriate host
response
in
a
speciﬁc
application.
The
tissue
response to an implant depends on a myriad of
factors ranging from the chemical, physical and
biological properties of the materials to the shape
and structure of the implant. In the case of
biodegradable
biomaterials,
their
active
bio-
compatibility must be demonstrated over time.
The chemical, physical, mechanical and biological
ARTICLE IN PRESS
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
763


---

# Page 3
properties of a biodegradable material will vary
with time and degradation products can be pro-
duced that have different levels of tissue compat-
ibility compared to the starting parent material.
Some of the important properties of a biodegrad-
able biomaterial can be summarized as follows [6]:
 The material should not evoke a sustained
inﬂammatory or toxic response upon implanta-
tion in the body.
 The material should have acceptable shelf life.
 The degradation time of the material should
match the healing or regeneration process.
 The material should have appropriate mechan-
ical properties for the indicated application and
the
variation
in
mechanical
properties
with
degradation
should
be
compatible
with
the
healing or regeneration process.
 The degradation products should be non-toxic,
and able to get metabolized and cleared from the
body.
 The material should have appropriate permeability
and processibility for the intended application.
Some of the inherent properties of polymeric
biomaterials that can have an affect on their
biocompatibility include: material chemistry, mole-
cular weight, solubility, shape and structure of the
implant, hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity, lubricity,
surface energy, water absorption, degradation and
erosion mechanism.
Given the complexity and the range of applica-
tions polymeric biomaterials are currently used,
there is not just one polymeric system available that
could be considered as an ideal biomaterial. This
underlines the need for developing a wide range of
biodegradable materials available for implant fab-
rication that can appropriately match the speciﬁc
and unique requirements of each individual medical
application.
Current efforts in biodegradable polymer synthesis
have been focused on custom designing and synthe-
sizing polymers with tailored properties for speciﬁc
applications by: (1) developing novel synthetic poly-
mers with unique chemistries to increase the diversity
of polymer structure, (2) developing biosynthetic
processes to form biomimetic polymer structures
and (3) adopting combinatorial and computational
approaches in biomaterial design to accelerate the
discovery of novel resorbable polymers.
Biodegradable
polymeric
materials
are
being
investigated in developing therapeutic devices such
as temporary prostheses, three-dimensional porous
structures as scaffolds for tissue engineering and for
pharmacological applications, such as drug delivery
(both localized and targeting systems). Some of the
current biomedical applications of biodegradable
polymeric materials include: (1) large implants, such
as bone screws, bone plates and contraceptive
reservoirs, (2) small implants, such as staples,
sutures and nano- or micro-sized drug delivery
vehicles, (3) plain membranes for guided tissue
regeneration
and
(4)
multiﬁlament
meshes
or
porous structures for tissue engineering [7]. A tissue
engineering approach uses a biodegradable con-
struct to assemble cells in three-dimensions to
ultimately develop into functioning tissue. Poly-
meric materials with a wide range of mechanical and
degradation properties are required to mimic the
properties of various tissues. In controlled drug
delivery, bioactive agents are entrapped within a
biodegradable polymer matrix from which they are
released
in an
erosion- or
diffusion-controlled
fashion or a combination of both. The release
characteristics
of
the
bioactive
agents
can
be
effectively modulated by suitably engineering the
matrix parameters.
Due to the versatility of polymeric materials, they
are rapidly replacing other material classes, such as
metals, alloys and ceramics for use as biomaterials.
In
2003,
the
sales
of
polymeric
biomaterials
exceeded $7 billion, accounting for almost 88% of
the total biomaterial market for that year [8]. It is
predicted that by 2008, the biocompatible materials
market will reach $11.9 billion suggesting a huge
market for polymeric biomaterials in the coming
decades.
2. Biodegradable polymers
Both synthetic polymers and biologically derived
(or natural) polymers have been extensively inves-
tigated as biodegradable polymeric biomaterials.
Biodegradation of polymeric biomaterials involves
cleavage of hydrolytically or enzymatically sensitive
bonds in the polymer leading to polymer erosion [9].
Depending on the mode of degradation, polymeric
biomaterials can be further classiﬁed into hydro-
lytically degradable polymers and enzymatically
degradable polymers. Most of the naturally occur-
ring polymers undergo enzymatic degradation.
Natural polymers can be considered as the ﬁrst
biodegradable biomaterials used clinically. The rate
of in vivo degradation of enzymatically degradable
ARTICLE IN PRESS
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
764


---

# Page 4
polymers however, varies signiﬁcantly with the site
of implantation depending on the availability and
concentration of the enzymes. Chemical modiﬁca-
tion of these polymers also can signiﬁcantly affect
their rate of degradation. Natural polymers possess
several inherent advantages such as bioactivity, the
ability to present receptor-binding ligands to cells,
susceptibility to cell-triggered proteolytic degrada-
tion and natural remodeling. The inherent bioactiv-
ity of these natural polymers has its own down-
sides. These include a strong immunogenic response
associated with most of the polymers, the complex-
ities associated with their puriﬁcation and the
possibility of disease transmission.
Synthetic biomaterials on the other hand are
generally biologically inert, they have more pre-
dictable properties and batch-to-batch uniformity
and they have the unique advantage having tailored
property proﬁles for speciﬁc applications, devoid
of many of the disadvantages of natural polymers.
Hydrolytically degradable polymers are generally
preferred as implants due to their minimal site-
to-site and patient-to-patient variations compared
to enzymatically degradable polymers [9]. The
successful performance of the ﬁrst synthetic poly(-
glycolic acid) based suture system during the late
1960s led to the design and development of a new
array
of
biodegradable
polymers
as
transient
implants
for
orthopaedic
and
related
medical
applications. Extensive research has gone since then
to custom designing biodegradable polymer systems
with
predictable
erosion
kinetics
as
drug/gene
delivery vehicles or as scaffolds for tissue engineer-
ing. For applications that need materials with a
certain level of biological activity, strategies to
incorporate biological motifs onto synthetic poly-
mers in the form of hybrid materials have also been
developed.
The objective of this review is to highlight
the
current
status
of
biodegradable
polymers
for
various
biomedical
applications
including
transient
implants,
drug
delivery
vehicles
and
tissue engineering scaffolds. This review covers the
general synthesis, biodegradation, biocompatibility
and potential biomedical applications of some of
the most promising polymeric biomaterials used
today.
The polymeric biomaterials discussed in this
review have been broadly classiﬁed into hydrolyti-
cally degradable polymers and enzymatically de-
gradable polymers placing emphasis on the mode of
degradation for the corresponding polymers.
3. Hydrolytically degradable polymers as
biomaterials
Hydrolytically degradable polymers are polymers
that have hydrolytically labile chemical bonds in
their back bone. The functional groups susceptible
to hydrolysis include esters, orthoesters, anhydrides,
carbonates, amides, urethanes, ureas, etc. [10].
Two general routes are used to develop hydro-
lytically sensitive polymers for biomedical applica-
tions. They are step (condensation) polymerization
and addition (chain) polymerization including ring-
opening polymerization. Step process is used to
prepare a variety of hydrolytically sensitive polymer
classes, such as polyanhydrides, poly(ortho esters)
and polyurethanes. Ring opening polymerization
(ROP) is an extensively investigated polymerization
route to develop hydrolytically sensitive polymers,
including the poly(a-esters) and polyphosphazenes.
Radical polymerization mostly results in the forma-
tion of non-degradable polymers; however, recent
studies have demonstrated the feasibility of devel-
oping synthetic degradable polymers or cross-linked
gels by radical polymerization processes. In addi-
tion, several polymers developed
by microbial
bioprocess are gaining signiﬁcant interest as biode-
gradable polymers. The following sections discuss
some of the most promising hydrolytically sensitive
synthetic polymers developed and their biomedical
applications.
3.1. Poly(a-esters)
Poly(a-ester)s are thermoplastic polymers with
hydrolytically labile aliphatic ester linkages in their
backbone. Although all polyesters are theoretically
degradable as esteriﬁcation is a chemically reversible
process, only aliphatic polyesters with reasonably
short aliphatic chains between ester bonds can
degrade over the time frame required for most of
the biomedical applications. Poly(a-esters) comprise
the earliest and most extensively investigated class
of biodegradable polymers. The uniqueness of this
class of polymers lies in its immense diversity and
synthetic versatility. Poly(a-ester)s can be developed
from a variety of monomers via ring opening and
condensation polymerization routes depending on
the monomeric units. Bacterial bioprocess routes
can also be used to develop some poly(a-ester)s.
Various synthetic routes for developing polyesters
have been recently reviewed by Okada et al. [11].
ARTICLE IN PRESS
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
765


---

# Page 5
Among the class of poly(a-ester)s, the most
extensively investigated polymers are the poly(a-
hydroxy acid)s, which include poly(glycolic acid)
and the stereoisomeric forms of poly(lactic acid).
The ﬁrst synthetic suture material was successfully
developed based on the glycolides in late 1960s.
Several other aliphatic polyesters were developed
since then as biodegradable biomaterials and are
attracting signiﬁcant attention as biomaterials due
to their good biocompatibility and controllable
degradation proﬁles. The class of poly(a-ester)s
now include poly(a-hydroxy acids) and other ester
polymers with and without oxygen atom adjacent to
the a-carbon of the acid moiety. Fig. 1 shows some
of the commercially developed meniscus repair
devices based on poly(a-ester)s [12].
Polyesters can be synthesized by the polyconden-
sation of difunctional monomers such as the self-
condensation of hydroxy acids, diacids with diols,
diacid chlorides with diols or by the ester inter-
change reaction of diesters and diols. However,
since it is difﬁcult to achieve high molecular weight
polymers by the polycondensation route, it has not
been extensively investigated for developing bioma-
terials [13].
ROP of cyclic lactones has developed into the
most effective one pot polymerization route to
develop high molecular weight homo- and co-
polyesters. The advantages of ROP over polycon-
densation route as a commercially viable process
are: milder reaction conditions, shorter reaction
times, the absence of reaction by-products and the
ability of using even six or seven membered lactones
[14]. During ROP, speciﬁc initiator molecules such
as hydroxyl containing molecules, can control the
molecular weight of the polymers. The rate of
polymerization can be controlled by the application
of a wide-range of biocompatible catalytic systems,
such as stannous octoate and 2-ethylhexanoic acid.
To further improve their biocompatibility, several
solvent-less polymerization routes have been devel-
oped. Table 1 shows the structure of various cyclic
lactones and their corresponding homopolymers.
The most extensively studied monomers for alipha-
tic polyester synthesis for biomedical applications
are lactide, glycolide and caprolactone [15]. In
addition to cyclic lactones, cyclic anhydrides can
also undergo ROP to form polyesters. Enzymatic
polyesteriﬁcation of bacterial origin is yet another
elegant method for developing polyesters [16].
Poly(a-ester)s mainly under go bulk erosion i.e.,
the polymeric matrices degrade all over their cross-
section and have erosion kinetics that are non-linear
and usually characterized by a discontinuity [17].
Several excellent reviews have been published on the
degradation mechanism of poly(a-ester)s [7,18–21].
Both homo-polymers and co-polymers of poly(a-
ester)s have been investigated as potential bioma-
terials for a variety of biomedical applications. The
following section will review the synthesis and
biomedical applications of some of these polymers.
3.1.1. Polyglycolide
Polyglycolide can be considered as one of the ﬁrst
biodegradable synthetic polymer investigated for
biomedical applications. Polyglycolide is a highly
crystalline
polymer
(45–55%
crystallinity)
and
therefore exhibits a high tensile modulus with very
low solubility in organic solvents. The glass transi-
tion temperature of the polymer ranges from 35 to
40 1C and the melting point is greater than 200 1C.
In spite of its low solubility, this polymer has
been
fabricated
into
a
variety
of
forms
and
structures. Extrusion, injection and compression
molding as well as particulate leaching and solvent
casting, are some of the techniques used to develop
polyglycolide-based structures for biomedical appli-
cations [22].
Due to its excellent ﬁber forming ability, poly-
glycolide was initially investigated for developing
resorbable sutures. The ﬁrst biodegradable synthetic
suture called DEXONs that was approved by the
United States (US) Food and Drug Administration
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 1. Some of the commercially developed poly ester-based
meniscus repair devices. (Left to right) Mitek Meniscal Repair
system, Clearﬁx Screw, Arthrex Dart, Bionx Meniscus Arrow,
Linvatec Biostinger, Smith & Nephew T-ﬁx, 2-0 Ethibond suture.
Reprinted from Ref. [12] with permission from Elsevier.
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
766


---

# Page 6
(FDA)
in
1969
was
based
on
polyglycolide.
Non-woven polyglycolide fabrics have been exten-
sively
used
as
scaffolding
matrices
for
tissue
regeneration due to its excellent degradability,
good initial mechanical properties and cell viability
on
the
matrices.
A
polyglycolide
non-woven
fabric-ﬁbrin glue composite matrix is currently
undergoing clinical trials. It is being investigated
as a biocompatible dural substitute due to its
excellent
skin-closing
ability
without
requiring
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Table 1
Structure of cyclic lactones and corresponding homopolymers
O
O
O
Cyclic lactone
Clycolide
Lactide
Dioxanone
Caprolactone
Trimethyl carbonate
Poly(trimethylene carbonate)
Poly(caprolactone)
Poly(dioxanone)
Poly(lactide)
Poly(glycolide)
Linear homopolymer
O
CH2
C
O
O
n
O
O
O
O
CH3
CH3
CH
C
O
O
CH3
n
O
O
O
CH2
C
O
O
O
(CH2)
n
2
O
O
C
O
O
(CH2)
n
5
O
O
O
C
O
O
(CH2)
n
3
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
767


---

# Page 7
sutures and its ability to help regenerate biological
tissue [23].
Polyglycolide shows excellent mechanical proper-
ties due to its high crystallinity. A self reinforced
form composed of polyglycolide is stiffer than any
other degradable polymeric system used clinically
[24] and has been shown to exhibit a modulus of
approximately 12.5 GPa [25]. Due to its good initial
mechanical properties, polyglycolides have been
investigated
as
bone
internal
ﬁxation
devices
(Bioﬁxs).
Polyglycolide
is
a
bulk
degrading
polymer,
degrades by the non-speciﬁc scission of the ester
backbone. The polymer is known to lose its strength
in 1–2 months when hydrolyzed and losses mass
within 6–12 months. In the body, polyglycolides are
broken down into glycine which can be excreted in
the urine or converted into carbon dioxide and
water via the citric acid cycle [25].
The high rate of degradation, acidic degradation
products and low solubility however, limit the
biomedical applications for polyglycolide. There-
fore, several copolymers containing glycolide units
are being developed to overcome the inherent
disadvantages of polyglycolide.
3.1.2. Polylactides
Unlike glycolide, lactide is a chiral molecule and
exist in two optically active forms; L-lactide and
D-lactide. The polymerization of these monomers
leads to the formation of semi-crystalline polymers.
The polymerization of racemic (D,L)-lactide and
mesolactide however, results in the formation of
amorphous polymers. Among these monomers,
L-lactide is the naturally occurring isomer. Similar
to polyglycolide, poly(L-lactide) (PLLA) is also a
crystalline polymer (37% crystallinity) and the
degree of crystallinity depends on the molecular
weight and polymer processing parameters. It has a
glass transition temperature of 60–65 1C and a
melting temperature of approximately 175 1C [15].
Poly(L-lactide) is a slow-degrading polymer com-
pared to polyglycolide, has good tensile strength,
low extension and a high modulus (approximately
4.8 GPa) and hence, has been considered an ideal
biomaterial for load bearing applications, such as
orthopaedic
ﬁxation
devices.
Some
of
the
PLLA-based orthopaedic products include: the
Phantom Soft Thread Soft Tissue Fixation Screws,
Phantom Suture Anchors (DePuy), Full Thread
Bio Interference Screws (Arthrex), BioScrews,
Bio-Anchors, Meniscal Stingers (Linvatec), and
the Clearﬁx Meniscal Darts (Innovasive Devices).
PLLA can also form high strength ﬁbers and was
FDA approved in 1971 for the development of an
improved suture over DEXONs. Due to the high
strength of PLLA ﬁbers, it has been investigated as
scaffolding material for developing ligament repla-
cement or augmentation devices to replace non-
degradable ﬁbers, such as Dacron [26,27]. Some
PLLA
ﬁber-based
devices
are
currently
under
investigation as long-term blood vessel conduits
[28]. An injectable form of PLLA (Sculptras) has
recently been approved
by the
FDA for
the
restoration or correction of facial fat loss or
lipoatrophy in people with the human immunode-
ﬁciency virus.
However, being more hydrophobic than polygly-
colide, the degradation rate of PLLA is very low.
It has been reported that high molecular weight
PLLA can take between 2 and 5.6 years for total
resorption in vivo [15,29]. The rate of degradation
however, depends on the degree of polymer crystal-
linity as well as the porosity of the matrix. Even
though the polymer is known to lose its strength in
approximately
6
months
when
hydrolyzed,
no
signiﬁcant changes in mass will occur for a very long
time. Therefore, several co-polymers of
L-lactides
with glycolides or DL-lactides are currently under
investigation for the development of polymers with
better property modulation. Thus Resomers LR708
is a 70:30 amorphous copolymer of poly(L-lactide-co-
DL-lactide) and is being extensively investigated as a
bioresorbable implant material [30].
Poly(DL-lactide)
(PDLLA)
is
an
amorphous
polymer due to the random distribution of L- and
D-lactide units and has a glass transition tempera-
ture of 55–60 1C. Due to its amorphous nature the
polymer shows much lower strength (1.9 GPa)
compared to poly(L-lactide). This polymer loses its
strength within 1–2 months when hydrolyzed and
undergoes a loss in mass within 12–16 months [25].
Being a low strength polymer with faster degrada-
tion rate compared to poly(L-lactide), it is a
preferred candidate for developing drug delivery
vehicles and as low strength scaffolding material for
tissue regeneration.
Polylactides undergo hydrolytic degradation via
the bulk erosion mechanism by the random scission
of the ester backbone. It degrades into lactic acid a
normal human metabolic by-product, which is
broken down into water and carbon dioxide via
the citric acid cycle [25].
ARTICLE IN PRESS
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
768


---

# Page 8
3.1.3. Poly(lactide-co-glycolide)
Among the co-polyesters investigated, extensive
research has been performed in developing a full
range
of
poly(lactide-co-glycolide)
polymers
(PLGA). Both L- and DL-lactides have been used
for co-polymerization. In the composition range of
25–75%, poly(L-lactide-co-glycolide) forms amor-
phous polymers. Miller et al. have shown that the
50/50 poly(lactide-co-glycolide) is very hydrolyti-
cally unstable and the resistance to hydrolytic
degradation was found to be more pronounced at
either end of the co-polymer composition range
[22,31]. The intermediate co-polymers were found to
be much more unstable compared to the homo-
polymers. Thus, 50/50 poly(DL-lactide-co-glycolide)
degrades in approximately 1–2 months, 75/25 in 4–5
months and 85/15 in 5–6 months [32].
Different
ratios
of
poly(lactide-co-glycolides)
have been commercially developed and are being
investigated for a wide range of biomedical applica-
tions. PuraSorbsPLG is a semicrystalline biore-
sorbable co-polymer of L-lactide and glycolide with
a monomer ratio of 80L:20G [33]. A co-polymer
containing 90% glycolic acid (GA) and 10% L-lactic
acid (LA) was initially used for the development of
the multiﬁlament suture Vicryls. A modiﬁed ver-
sion of the suture, Vicryl Rapids, is currently on
the market, which is an irradiated version of the
suture to increase the rate of degradation. PANA-
CRYLs is another commercially developed suture
from the co-polymer with a higher LA/GA ratio in
order to decrease the rate of degradation. Several
co-polymers have subsequently been developed for
the fabrication of monoﬁlament sutures. These
include poly(glycolide-co-trimethylene carbonate)
and
poly(glycolide-co-caprolactone)
containing
hard and soft segments along the polymer backbone
for property modulation. Other applications of
PLGA are in the form of meshes (Vicryl Meshs),
suture reinforcements, skin replacement materials
and duramater substitutes. The tissue engineered
skin graft (Dermagrafts) use a Vicryl Meshs as the
scaffolding structure.
PLGA has been shown to under go bulk erosion
through hydrolysis of the ester bonds and the rate of
degradation depends on a variety of parameters
including the LA/GA ratio, molecular weight, and
the shape and structure of the matrix. The major
popularity of these biocompatible co-polymers can
be attributed in part to their approval by the FDA
for use in humans, its good processibility which
enables fabrication of a variety of structures and
forms, controllable degradation rates and their
success as biodegradable sutures compared to the
earlier suture materials. As such, there has been
extensive investigation into its use as an ideal
biomaterial for temporary medical applications,
such as controlled drug/protein delivery systems
and as scaffolds for tissue engineering.
PLGA demonstrates good cell adhesion and
proliferation making it a potential candidate for
tissue engineering applications. Various studies have
been performed so far using micro- and nano-
fabrication techniques to form three-dimensional
scaffolds based on PLGA [34–37]. Fig. 2 illustrates
three structures developed from PLAGA using
various micro- and nano-fabrication techniques.
Another application of biodegradable PLGA is
for use in guided tissue regeneration by providing
a
permeable
material
for
space
preservation.
A composite PLGA-collagen matrix is currently in
the market (CYTOPLAST Resorbs) as a guided
tissue
regeneration
membrane.
LUPRON
DE-
POTs is a drug delivery vehicle composed of
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 2. Porous three-dimensional structures developed from PLGA using (a) gas foaming (reprinted from Ref. [35] with permission from
Elsevier), (b) microsphere sintering (reprinted from Ref. [36] with permission from Elsevier) and (c) electrospinning (reprinted from Ref.
[37] with permission from Wiley Interscience).
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
769


---

# Page 9
PLGA used for the release of a gonadotropin
releasing hormone analog for prostate cancer and
endometriosis.
Several
drug
delivery
vehicles
composed
of
PLGA, such as microspheres, microcapsules, nano-
spheres and nanoﬁbers have been developed for the
controlled release of drugs or proteins. Depending
on the nature of the PLGA used, the drug or protein
has been shown to have varying extents of interac-
tions with the base polymer resulting in rapid or
prolonged release proﬁles [38]. However, due to the
bulk degradation of the polymers, the achievement
of zero-order release kinetics from these polymer
matrices has been found to be difﬁcult. Another
concern with using PLGA as a protein delivery
vehicle is the possibility of protein denaturation
within the delivery vehicle due to the bulk degrada-
tion mechanism of the polymer and the acidic
degradation products produced. This has led to the
search
for
surface
eroding
polymers
as
ideal
candidates for developing drug delivery vehicles.
Surface eroding polymers have a greater ability
to achieve zero-order release kinetics for mol-
ecules delivered from the matrix and are able
to protect hydrolytically sensitive molecules by
encapsulation.
3.1.4. Polydioxanone
Although biodegradable polylactides and glyco-
lides have allowed for the development of versatile
resorbable multiﬁlament sutures for biomedical
applications, much research has gone into develop-
ing materials that would facilitate the formation of
monoﬁlament sutures. Multiﬁlament sutures have a
higher risk of infection associated with their use and
causes a greater amount of friction when penetrat-
ing tissues. Polydioxanone (PDS) was the material
of choice for the ﬁrst commercially developed
monoﬁlament suture under the trade name of
PDSs in the 1980s. In addition to sutures, PDS
has also been investigated for several orthopaedic
applications as ﬁxation screws for small bone
and osteochondral fragments (Orthosorb Absorb-
able Pinss) [39]. PDS is a colorless, semicrystalline
polymer prepared by the ROP of p-dioxanone
(Table 1). The polymer exhibits a very low glass
transition temperature ranging from 10 1C to 0 1C.
Being a polyester, it undergoes degradation by
the non-speciﬁc scission of the ester back bone.
However, due to the high crystallinity and hydro-
phobicity of the polymer, it can be considered
a slow to moderately degrading polymer. In the
body,
PDS
is
broken
down
into
glycoxylate
and
excreted
in
the
urine
or
converted
into
glycine
and
subsequently
into
carbon
dioxide
and
water
similar
to
polyglycolides
[25].
The
modulus
of
PDS
is
very
low
(approximately
1.5 GPa) compared to polyglycolides. The polymer
is known to lose its strength within 1–2 months and
its mass within 6–12 months by hydrolytic degrada-
tion [25].
3.1.5. Polycaprolactone
Polycaprolactone (PCL) (Table 1) is a semicrystal-
line polyester and is of great interest as it can be
obtained by the ROP of a relatively cheap monomeric
unit ‘e-caprolactone’. The PCL is highly processible
as it is soluble in a wide range of organic solvents, has
a low melting point (55–601C) and glass transition
temperature (60 1C) while having the ability to form
miscible blends with wide range of polymers. The
polymer undergoes hydrolytic degradation due to the
presence
of
hydrolytically
labile
aliphatic
ester
linkages; however, the rate of degradation is rather
slow (2–3 years). Due to the slow degradation, high
permeability to many drugs and non-toxicity, PCL
was initially investigated as a long-term drug/vaccine
delivery vehicle. The long-term contraceptive device
Capronors, is composed of this polymer and has
been developed for the long-term zero order release of
levonorgestrel [40]. PCL has low tensile strength
(approximately
23MPa)
but
an extremely
high
elongation at breakage (4700%) [22]. Extensive
research is ongoing to develop various micro- and
nano-sized drug delivery vehicles based on PCL [41].
Due to its excellent biocompatibility, PCL has also
been extensively investigated as scaffolds for tissue
engineering. A recent study demonstrated the feasi-
bility of using a composite matrix composed of PCL
and hyaluronic acid as a potential meniscus substitute
[42]. Composites of PCL with calcium phosphate
based ceramics are also currently being investigated
as suitable scaffolds for bone tissue engineering [43].
Due to the slow degradation rate of PCL, several
co-polymeric systems containing PCL have been
investigated to improve the properties of the native
polymer. Co-polymers of e-caprolactone with DL-
lactide have yielded materials with more rapid
degradation rates. Similarly, a co-polymer of e-
caprolactone and glycolide resulted in ﬁbers that
were less stiff compared to those made of poly-
glycolide and are currently on the market as a
monoﬁlament suture (MONACRYLs). Another
bioresorbable multiblock co-polymer composed of
ARTICLE IN PRESS
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
770


---

# Page 10
e-caprolactone, glycolide, lactide and poly(ethylene
glycol) units has been developed as a drug delivery
vehicle for small and medium sized biologically
active molecules (SynBiosyss).
3.1.6. Poly(trimethylene carbonate)
High molecular weight ﬂexible poly(trimethylene
carbonate) (PTMC) (Table 1) can be obtained by
the ROP of trimethylene carbonate. Being an
elastomeric aliphatic polyester with excellent ﬂex-
ibility and poor mechanical strength, PTMC has
been investigated as a candidate implant material
for soft tissue regeneration. Low molecular weight
PTMC on the other hand, has been investigated as a
suitable
material
for
developing
drug
delivery
vehicles. Unlike the previously described polyesters,
PTMC undergoes surface degradation with the rate
of in vivo degradation was found to be much higher
than in vitro degradation. This is presumably due to
the contribution of in vivo enzymatic degradation
process [44]. The low mechanical performance of
the homopolymer signiﬁcantly limits its applications
and consequently, several co-polymers were devel-
oped with other cyclic lactones. Thus, polyglyco-
nates have been developed as block co-polymers of
trimethylene carbonate and glycolides for use as
ﬂexible suture materials (Maxons) and orthopaedic
tacks and screws (Acufexs). BioSyns is a terpoly-
mer composed of glycolide, trimethylene carbonate
and dioxane that has reduced stiffness and degrades
within 3–4 months and has been used as suture
materials.
3.1.7. Bacterial polyesters
Bacterial polyesters are naturally occurring bio-
degradable polyesters produced by many bacteria as
their energy source. The most common polymer
among this class is poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB),
which was discovered in 1920 as produced by the
bacteria ‘‘Bacillus megaterium’’ (Fig. 3). Since then,
it was discovered that several other bacterial strains
could
produce
the
same
polymer.
PHB
is
a
semi-crystalline isotactic polymer that undergoes
surface erosion by hydrolytic cleavage of the ester
bonds and has a melting temperature in the range of
160–180 1C [16]. In addition to a bacterial synthetic
route, several chemical synthetic routes have been
developed for PHB synthesis. Shelton et al. [45],
demonstrated that the ROP of optically active
b-butyrolactone can result in the formation of
PHB, which is identical to the bacterial PHB. The
co-polymers of PHB and 3-hydroxyvalerate P(HB-
HV) have similar semi-crystalline properties as
PHB; however, the melting temperature is lower
depending on the HV content [46]. The polymer
shows glass transition temperature in the range of
5 to 20 1C. Both PHB and P(HB-HV) have been
found to be soluble in a wide range of solvents and
can be processed into different shapes and struc-
tures, such as ﬁlms, sheets, spheres and ﬁbers. Since
the homopolymer PHB is a tough, brittle polymer,
the less brittle and tougher co-polymer has more
potential as a biomaterial. Another unique property
of P(HB-HV) is its piezoelectricity which makes it a
potential candidate for orthopaedic applications
since electrical stimulation is known to promote
bone healing. It has also been investigated as a
material for developing bone pins and plates [46].
The hydrolytic degradation of PHB results in the
formation of D-()-3-hydroxy-butyric acid which is
a normal constituent of blood (concentrations
between 0.3 and 1.3 mM). However, PHB has a
rather low degradation rate in the body compared
to synthetic polyesters presumably due to its high
crystallinity. The co-polymer, P(HB-HV), being less
crystalline undergoes degradation at a much faster
rate, however, no correlation has been found
between the degradation rate and the amount of
HV in the co-polymer. The mass loss of this
polymer follows a zero-order release kinetics and
this property along with its hydrophobic nature
indicate that this polymer primarily undergoes
surface erosion. This property makes it an ideal
candidate for developing drug delivery vehicles that
can achieve zero-order drug release. The in vivo
degradation of these polymers is slow, although not
many degradation studies have been performed. As
such,
PHB
and
P(HB-HV)
may
be
potential
biodegradable candidates for long term implants.
Attempts are currently underway to increase the
rate of degradation of these polymers by blending
them with more hydrophilic polymers or other low
molecular weight additives to increase water pene-
tration and facilitate degradation [47].
ARTICLE IN PRESS
CH
C
O
O
CH3
n
CH2
Fig. 3. Structure of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) PHB.
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
771


---

# Page 11
3.2. Polyurethanes
Biostable
polyurethanes
and
poly(ether
ur-
ethanes) have been extensively investigated as long
term medical implants, such as cardiac pacemakers
and vascular grafts due to their excellent biocom-
patibility and mechanical properties. Based on the
good biological performances of biostable polyur-
ethanes and their synthetic versatility, attempts were
made
to
develop
biodegradable
polyurethanes.
Polyurethanes are generally prepared by the poly-
condensation reaction of diisocyanates with alco-
hols and/amines [48]. However, due to the toxicity
of common diisocyanates such as 4,40-methylenedi-
phenyl diisocyanate (MDI) and toluene diisocya-
nate
(TDI),
other
biocompatible
aliphatic
diisocyanates have been investigated for the devel-
opment of biodegradable polyurethanes. Lysine
diisocyanate
(LDI),
and
1,4-diisocyanatobutane
(BDI) are a few. Degradable poly(ester urethanes)
were developed by reacting LDI with polyester diols
or triols based on
D,L-lactide, caprolactone and
other co-polymers having a wide range of properties
[49]. In these biodegradable polyurethanes, aliphatic
polyesters such as lactide/glycolide copolymers or
polycaprolactones form the soft segments and
polypeptides form the hard segments [50]. Another
unique feature of the peptide-based polymer sys-
tems is that active moieties such as ascorbic acid and
glucose can be incorporated into the polymer which
could potentially promote cell adhesion, viability
and proliferation without any adverse effect [51]. A
biodegradable elastic poly(ester urethane) (Degra-
pols) is being used to develop highly porous
scaffold for tissue engineering application [52].
Injectable biodegradable polymers are attractive
materials
as
they
can
alleviate
many
of
the
challenges associated with current surgical techni-
ques and pre-fabricated tissue engineered implants.
Several biodegradable injectable hydrogels systems
have been developed; however, only very few studies
have
been
performed
at
developing
injectable
materials suitable for orthopaedic applications.
These
materials
would
require
the
additional
property of having good mechanical properties
and controlled degradability. A unique injectable,
two component LDI-based polyurethane system
that cures in situ was recently developed for
orthopaedic applications (PolyNovas). This self-
setting system can be administered arthroscopically
in liquid form and polymerizes at physiological
temperature in situ to provide appropriate bonding
strength and mechanical support comparable to or
superior to widely used bone cements. This material
has also been shown to promote favorable cell
adhesion and proliferation [53].
3.3. Poly(ester amide)
Due to the hydrogen bonding ability of the amide
bonds and biodegradability imparted by the ester
bonds, these co-polymers have good mechanical
and
thermal
properties.
The
degradation
of
poly(ester amides) has been shown to take place by
the hydrolytic cleavage of the ester bonds, leaving
the amide segments more or less intact. The good
mechanical properties of poly(ester amides) derived
from
symmetrical
bisamide-diols
and
succinyl
chloride led to its investigation as a potential
bioresorbable
suture
materials.
Different
water
soluble bisamide-diols have also been prepared
from glycolic acid and diaminoalkanes containing
2–12 methylene groups [54]. Attempts were also
made to increase the degradation rate of poly(ester
amides) by incorporating amino acid units in the
polymer
backbone.
CAMEOs
is
a
poly(ester
amide) blend based on leucine or phenylalanine that
is currently being developed for the site speciﬁc
delivery of small hydrophobic drugs and peptides.
3.4. Poly(ortho esters)
The disadvantages of bulk eroding biodegradable
polymers for use as drug delivery vehicles has led to
the search for more hydrophobic polymers with
hydrolytically sensitive backbones that could under
go surface erosion. Poly(ortho esters) were devel-
oped by the ALZA corporation (Alzamers) as a
hydrophobic, surface eroding polymer designed
speciﬁcally for drug delivery applications. Although
the ortho ester linkages are hydrolytically labile, the
polymer is hydrophobic enough such that its
erosion in aqueous environments is very slow. The
unique feature of poly(ortho esters) is that in
addition to its surface erosion mechanism, the rate
of degradation for these polymers, pH sensitivity,
and glass transition temperatures can be controlled
by using diols with varying levels of chain ﬂexibility.
The pH sensitivity of the poly(ortho esters) has
lead to the development of several drug deli-
very systems using this polymer. The rate of drug
release is predominantly controlled by the rate of
polymer hydrolysis through the use of acidic or
basic excipients. By now four different classes of
ARTICLE IN PRESS
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
772


---

# Page 12
poly(ortho esters) have been developed [55]. Fig. 4
shows the structures of different types of poly-
orthoesters. Poly(ortho ester) I (POE I) is synthe-
sized by the transesteriﬁcation between a diol and
diethoxytetrahydrofuran.
One
of
its
hydrolysis
products, g-hydroxybutyric acid, has an autocata-
lytic effect on the further degradation of the
polymer. Poly(ortho ester) II (POE II) was synthe-
sized to overcome the autocatalytic effect of POE I
and its degradation products are neutral molecules.
Poly(ortho ester) II is synthesized by the reaction of
diols
with
diketene
acetal
3,9-bis(ethylidene
2,4,8,10-tetraoxaspiro[5,5]undecane). The degrada-
tion rate of this polymer can be modulated by
adding acid excipient such as itaconic and adipic
acids. Poly(ortho ester) III (POE III) is synthesized
by the direct polymerization of a triol with an
orthoester. In this case, the polymer chains are
highly
ﬂexible
making
the
polymer
a
gel-like
material at room temperature. The viscous nature
allows for the incorporation of therapeutic agents
into the polymer matrix without the need for
solvents. The release of 5-ﬂurouracil from this
polymer matrix has been demonstrated to follow a
zero-order release kinetics and has been extensively
investigated for ocular applications [56,57]. How-
ever, the gel-like consistency and the technical
difﬁculties in scaling up the synthetic procedure
are the limitations of POE III. This led to the
development of POE IV. Poly(ortho ester) IV was
developed as a modiﬁcation of poly(ortho ester) II
to allow for an appreciable degradation rate without
the addition of an acid excipient. This was achieved
by incorporating short segments based on lactic or
glycolic acid into the polymer backbone. Upon
exposure to aqueous environments, the latent acid
will undergo hydrolysis, and the liberated lactic or
glycolic acid will catalyze further polymer hydro-
lysis. The rate of degradation for these polymers can
also be ﬁnely controlled to vary from a few days to
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O
O
O
CH
CH3
C
O
R'
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
R
POE-IV
n
n=1-6
C
OCH(CH2)4
OCH2
O
R
n
POE-III
O
O
O
O
O
OR
n
POE-II
O
OR
O
n
POE-I
Fig. 4. Structures of different poly(ortho ester)s.
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
773


---

# Page 13
several months by changing the amount of the acid
segment in the polymer backbone. Additionally, by
varying the nature of the diols, solid materials or
soft gel-like materials can be obtained. Extensive
biocompatibility evaluations of POE IV have been
performed, which demonstrate the good biocompat-
ibility of the polymer. Thus, among the four
different
classes of POEs,
POE
IV has been
considered to be the biomaterial with greatest
potential having not only a scalable synthetic
procedure, but also the ability to provide well-
controlled release proﬁles for a wide range of
pharmaceutical agents, including proteins [56].
3.5. Polyanhydrides
Polyanhydrides can be considered as the most
extensively investigated biodegradable surface erod-
ing polymers speciﬁcally designed and developed for
drug delivery applications. Polyanhydrides are one
of the most hydrolytically labile polymers due to the
highly sensitive aliphatic anhydride bonds on the
polymer backbone. The hydrolytically labile back-
bone coupled with the hydrophobicity of the
polymer precludes water penetration into the matrix
allowing polyanhydrides to truly undergo surface
erosion. The aliphatic polyanhydrides were devel-
oped in 1932 as a ﬁber forming polymer for textile
applications [58]. Due to its hydrolytic instability
and surface eroding nature, Langer et al., investi-
gated this class of polymers as candidate materials
for controlled drug delivery applications in 1980s
[59]. In 1996, this material was approved by the US
FDA, as a drug delivery vehicle following extensive
in vitro and in vivo drug release and biocompatibility
evaluations [9].
Polyanhydrides are synthesized via melt conden-
sation of diacids/diacid esters, ROP of anhydrides,
interfacial condensation, dehydrochlorination of
diacids and diacid chlorides or by the reaction of
diacyl chlorides with coupling agents such as
phosgene or
diphosgene
[60,61].
A
variety
of
catalyst
systems
for polymerization
have been
identiﬁed, which has enabled the synthesis of high
molecular weight polyanhydrides. Both homo- and
co-polyanhydrides having different properties have
been developed by the melt condensation method.
Aliphatic homo-polyanhydrides, such as poly(se-
bacic anhydride) (PSA), have been found to have
limited applications due to their crystalline structure
and
fast
degradation.
Several
co-polymers
of
sebacic anhydride and hydrophobic aromatic co-
monomers have been investigated to develop poly-
meric systems with controllable degradation rate
and processibility.
Polyanhydrides are generally classiﬁed as surface
eroding polymers because they undergo a linear
mass loss during erosion. However, studies have
shown that their degradation is not strictly limited
to the surface of the polymer matrix and additional
studies have tried to elucidate other parameters that
affect polyahydride degradation [62–64].
The most extensively investigated polyanhydride
is poly[(carboxy phenoxy propane)-(sebacic acid)]
(PCPP-SA). Fig. 5 shows the structure of P(CPP-
SA). The polymer has been found to exhibit a zero-
order release of incorporated drug over periods of
time ranging from days to years depending on the
ratio of the co-monomers used and the molecular
weight of the polymer. The degradation products of
the polymers have been found to be non-toxic and
biocompatible [9,59,65,66]. This polymer was been
approved by the US FDA for use as a localized
delivery vehicle for the controlled delivery of the
chemotherapeutic agent BCNU for the treatment of
brain cancer (Gliadels). A co-polymer of 1:1
sebacic acid and erucic acid dimer has been found
to be useful as a potential delivery vehicle for
gentamicine (Septacins) in the treatment of osteo-
myelitis [67]. The in vivo drug release of Septacins
in rats demonstrated extremely low gentamicin
plasma levels, indicating a low systemic exposure
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
7
n
O
Fig. 5. Structure of poly[(carboxy phenoxy propane)-(sebacic acid) P(CPP-SA).
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
774


---

# Page 14
to the drug. Septacins has also showed efﬁcacy in
rat skin-abscess and horse joint infection models. A
recent human trial has corroborated the results of
the prior animal studies, conﬁrming the potential
use of this polymer drug-delivery system.
In addition to aromatic co-monomers, highly
hydrophobic
aliphatic
linear
fatty
acid
dimers
(FAD) have also been investigated for developing
slow degrading polyanhydrides [68]. The degrada-
tion rate of these fatty acid polymers can be further
modulated by using non-linear fatty acid dimers
[63]. Due to the availability of a wide range of diacid
monomers, different types of polyanhydrides with
ether, ester and urethane linkages were also devel-
oped [69].
3.6. Poly(anhydride-co-imide)
Although polyanhydrides were found to be ideal
candidates for drug delivery applications due to
their surface eroding properties, the mechanical
performance of these polymers were found to be less
than optimal for load bearing applications, such as
for orthopaedic implants. The Young’s modulus for
poly[1,6-bis(carboxyphenoxy)
hexane]
is
only
1.3 MPa, which is well below the modulus for
human cancellous bone [70]. The search for high
strength polyanhydrides with surface eroding prop-
erties has led to the development of poly(anhydride-
co-imides) due to the imide segments in the poly-
mer back bone imparting unusual strength. The
poly(anhydride-co-imides) were found to under go
degradation via the anhydride bonds ﬁrst, followed
by the hydrolysis of the imide bonds [71]. Laurencin
et al., have investigated the mechanical performance
and biocompatibility of a wide range of poly(anhy-
dride-co-imides), such as poly[pyromellitylimidoa-
lanine-co-1,6-bis(p-carboxyphenoxy) hexane] (PMA
ala:CPH) (Fig. 6) as scaffolds for bone tissue
engineering applications [72,73]. The osteocompat-
ibility of these polymers were investigated using a
rat tibial model. It was shown that the untreated
defects healed in 12 days. In comparison, the defects
treated with poly(anhydride-co-imides) produced
endosteal bone growth as early as day 3 and formed
bridges of cortical bone around the implanted
matrices by day 30 demonstrating the good osteo-
compatibility
of
the
matrices
[73].
The
good
mechanical performance of these polymers has also
been demonstrated. Polymers based on succinic acid
trimellitylimidoglycine and trimellitylimidoalanine
have
compressive
strength
on
the
order
of
50–60 MPa suggesting their suitability for ortho-
paedic applications [70].
3.7. Cross-linked polyanhydrides
Another approach investigated to increase the
mechanical strength of polyanhydrides is by in-
corporating acrylic functional groups in the mono-
meric units to form injectable photocrosslinkable
polyanhydrides. Injectable anhydrides can be used
for ﬁlling irregularly shaped bone defects or for soft
tissue repairs that require materials with a liquid or
putty-like consistency, which can set and be molded
into a desired shape under physiological condi-
tions. Fig. 7 shows the structure of the polymers
poly(sebacic acid)(PSA) and poly(1-3-bis(p-carbox-
yphenoxy)propane) (PCPP) and poly(1-6-bis(p-car-
boxy phenxoy)hexane) (PCPH). The hydrolytic
degradation products of these polymers are non-
toxic and composed of the corresponding diacid
molecules and water-soluble linear methacrylic acid
molecules. Different types of initiator-accelerator
systems and energy sources have been investigated
to develop crosslinkable matrices with appropriate
thickness for orthopaedic applications. The most
effective composition for the photopolymerization
of
these
polymers
was
found
to
be
1.0 wt%
camphorquinone (CQ) and 1.0 wt% ethyl-4-N,N-
dimethyl aminobenzoate (EDMAB) with 150 mW/
cm2 of blue light. As in the case of polyanhydrides,
the mechanical strength and degradation rate of
the crosslinked polyanhydrides has been found to
depend on the nature of the monomeric units.
A compressive strength similar to the lower range of
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O
O
N
H3C
O
O
O
N
CH3
O
O
O
O CH2
O
O
x
y
6
Fig. 6. Structure of poly[pyromellitylimidoalanine-co-1,6-bis(p-carboxyphenoxy) hexane].
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
775


---

# Page 15
cancellous bone (30–40 Mpa) has been reported for
this class of polymers [75].
3.8. Poly(propylene fumarate)
Another injectable biodegradable high-strength
polymeric biomaterial developed for orthopaedic
applications
is
the
co-polyester
poly(propylene
fumarate (PPF) (Fig. 8). Several routes, including
the transesteriﬁcation of fumaric diester, can be
used to synthesize linear PPF. These synthetic
procedures have been extensively reviewed by Peter
et al. [76].
PPF is known to under go bulk erosion via
hydrolysis of the ester bonds and the degradation
time
depends
on
several
parameters,
such
as
molecular weight, type of cross-linker, and cross-
linking
density.
The
degradation
products
are
fumaric acid, a naturally occurring molecule found
in the tricarboxylic acid cycle and 1,2 -propane diol,
a common diluent of drug formulations. The
molecular weight of linear PPF has been found to
be rather low, while one unique feature of this
polymer is the presence of unsaturated fumarate
groups on the polymer back bone which can be used
to further cross link the polymer to improve the
material properties [77].
Several attempts have been made to develop
mechanically competent biodegradable systems for
orthopaedic applications by cross-linking PPF or by
developing composites using ceramic materials.
Cross-linked PPF was developed by co-polymeriz-
ing with acrylic monomers, such as methyl metha-
crylate or N-vinyl pyrolidone, using different types
of polymerization initiators. The cross-linked ma-
trices demonstrated a compressive strength in the
order of 1–12 MPa depending on the composition
and conditions of polymerization [76]. Composites
of PPF with ceramics, such as tricalcium phosphate
or calcium sulfate, created high strength matrices
(2–30 MPa) suitable for orthopaedic applications
[77]. These
cross-linked polymer matrices also
supported good cell viability and could function as
a growth factor delivery system making them
promising candidates for bone tissue engineering
applications.
3.9. Pseudo poly(amino acid)
Poly(amino acid)s are ubiquitous, naturally-oc-
curring biodegradable polymers; however, their
application as a biomaterial has been limited due
to immunogenicity and poor mechanical perfor-
mances. To overcome these limitations, attempts
have been made to develop pseudo amino acids
composed of amino acids linked by non-amide
bonds such as esters, imino carbonates and carbo-
nates. One of the most extensively investigated
system is the tyrosine-derived poly(amino acids)
using desaminotyrosyl-tyrosine alkyl esters as the
building blocks (Fig. 9). Due to the aromatic
backbone, these polymers show good engineering
properties and therefore could serve as a mechani-
cally-competent, biodegradable polymer system for
load bearing biomedical applications.
Tyrosine-derived polycarbonates are a versatile
polymer class in which the glass transition tempera-
tures (50–90 1C) and the mechanical properties
(strength 50–70 Mpa, stiffness 1–2 Gpa) can be
easily tailored by varying the pendant alkyl chain
[78]. These polymers
have been found
to be
amorphous, hydrophobic and undergo slow hydro-
lytic degradation at physiological temperature. The
in vitro degradation products were found to be
desaminotyrosyl-tyrosine and alcohol, in vivo the
ARTICLE IN PRESS
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
CH2
6
n
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
CH2
CH2
3
n
o
o
8
o
o
o
o
n
Fig. 7. Structure of photocrosslinked polymers (a) poly(sebacic
acid) (PSA), poly(1-3 bis(p-carboxyphenoxy)propane) (PCPP)
and (c) poly(1-6 bis(p-carboxy phenxoy)hexane) (PCPH).
o
o
o
o
OH
CH3
CH3
m
HO
Fig. 8. Structure of polypropylene fumarate.
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
776


---

# Page 16
degradation products undergo further enzymatic
degradation to form desaminotyrosine and tyrosine.
The good in vitro and in vivo osteocompatibility and
mechanical properties of carbonate polymers make
them suitable candidates for developing long-term
orthopaedic implants. The carbonate polymers have
already been investigated as candidate materials for
fracture ﬁxation pins [79].
One signiﬁcant difference between PLLA and
tyrosine-derived carbonates is in their water ab-
sorbtivity. The tyrosine-derived polymers do not to
take up more than 5% water even at later stages of
degradation and are able to maintain their shape for
a longer period of time. PLLA on the other hand
swell
signiﬁcantly
with
time.
Another
unique
advantage of tyrosine-derived carbonate is that
because of their hydrophobic degradation products,
the polymer experiences a mass loss only at the very
end of the degradation process. PLLA shows
signiﬁcant mass loss when the molecular weight
reaches the threshold value of 20,000. The low
acidity of the degradation products of tyrosine-
derived carbonate compared to PLLA is another
signiﬁcant advantage. In a study that compared the
acidic degradation products of different polymers, it
was reported that poly(glycolic acid), poly(lactic
acid), poly (DTE adipate) and poly(DTE carbo-
nate) give rise to 15.5, 11.4, 6.4, and 2.6 mEq of acid
per gram of the polymer [80].
An unique feature of poly(desaminotyrosyl-tyr-
osine ethyl ester) is its ability to form high strength
ﬁbers by melt extrusion (ultimate tensile strength of
ARTICLE IN PRESS
A
CH2
CH2
C
O
NH
CH
C
CH2
O
C
O
O
O
R
n
B
CH2 CH2 C
O
NH
CH
C
CH2
O
C
O
O
O
R
n
Y
C
O
C
CH2 CH2 C
O
NH
CH
C
CH2
O
C
O
O
O
R
f
O
C
O
O
PEG
l-f
D
CH2 CH2 C
O
NH
CH
C
CH2
O
C
O
O
O
R
O
(CH2CH2O)m
n
Fig. 9. Chemical structures of (A) tyrosine derived polycarbonates, (B) tyrosine derived polyarylates, (C) tyrosine containing poly(DTR-
PEG carbonate) and (D) tyrosine containing poly(DTR-PEG ether).
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
777


---

# Page 17
230 Mpa and Young’s moduli of 3.1 Gpa) with
better mechanical properties than PLLA. After 30
weeks of incubation in water, these ﬁbers retained
87% of the strength, whereas PLLA ﬁbers decreased
to 7% of its initial strength after 2 weeks of
incubation [81]. Different tyrosine carbonate blend
systems are currently under development each
having unique cellular responses for use as ideal
candidates for tissue engineering applications [82].
Tyrosine-derived polyarylates are soft elastomeric
forms of pseudo(amino acids) having faster degra-
dation rates than the carbonates. One unique
feature of this class of polymer is the predictability
of properties, such as glass transition temperature,
hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity, crystallinity which
tend to vary with the number of carbon or oxygen
atoms in the polymer backbone or pendent chains.
This allows for the development of polymers with a
wide spectrum of properties from soft and elasto-
meric to strong materials, as well as from amor-
phous to liquid crystalline materials [83].
Tyrosine containing poly(DTR-PEG carbonate)
and poly(DTR-PEG ether) have also been devel-
oped as highly hydrophilic, water-soluble polymers
based on tyrosine. These polymers are biocompa-
tible and degradable and have potential applications
as drug delivery vehicles and as thromboresistant
coatings.
3.10. Poly(alkyl cyanoacrylates)
Poly(alkyl cyanoacrylate)s (PCA) form the major
class of biodegradable acrylate polymers used for
biomedical applications. Poly(alkyl cyanoacrylates)
have so far been investigated as excellent synthetic
surgical glue, skin adhesive and an embolic material.
Poly(alkyl cyanoacrylates) can also be considered to
be one of the ﬁrst biodegradable polymers used for
developing nanoparticles for drug delivery applica-
tion. Fig. 10 shows the structure of PCA. These are
neutral polymers prepared by the anionic polymer-
ization of alkyl cyanoacrylic monomers with a trace
amount of moisture as the initiator. The uniqueness
of poly(cyano acrylates) is the instability of the
carbon–carbon sigma bond on polymer backbone.
The hydrolytic sensitivity of the backbone has been
attributed to
the
high
inductive
activation
of
methylene hydrogen atoms by the electron with-
drawing neighboring groups.
Poly(cyano acrylates) are one of the fastest
degrading polymers having degradation times ran-
ging from few hours to few days. The degradation
rate for these polymers depends on the length of the
alkyl side groups. The lower alkyl derivatives, such
as poly(methyl cyano acrylate), degrade within
hours in an aqueous environment; however, it leads
to toxic degradation products such as cyanoacetic
acid and formaldehyde. Most of the research in this
area has therefore been concentrated on higher alkyl
derivatives, such as octyl and isobutyl cyanoacry-
lates. Due to the fast polymerization rate, these
monomers have also been investigated as tissue
adhesives. Dermabonds (2-octyl cyanoacrylate) has
been approved by the US FDA as a tissue adhesive
for topical skin application. Poly(alkyl cyanocry-
lates) have also been extensively investigated for use
as gene delivery vehicles and are considered to be
unique matrices for the delivery of oligodeoxynu-
cleotides (ODN) due to the unique hydrophobic
interactions the matrix has with ODN [84].
Extensive research has gone into PCA nanopar-
ticles as drug delivery vehicles following the studies
by Couvreur in late 1970s. PCA nanoparticles have
several advantages over other polymeric nanoparti-
cles such as easy preparation, high utility size
ranges, absence of solvent residues, ability to form
stealth nanoparticles and the ability of PCA to
absorb or encapsulate a wide range of drug or
protein molecules [85]. As such, several PCA based
nanoparticles are currently undergoing late stage
clinical trials for cancer therapy [86].
3.11. Polyphosphazenes
In addition to organic polymers, several inorganic
or inorganic–organic hybrid polymers have also
been investigated as potential biodegradable bio-
materials. Polyphosphazenes are hybrid polymers
with a backbone of alternating phosphorus and
nitrogen atoms containing two organic side groups
attached to each phosphorus atom. Fig. 11 shows
the general structure of polyphosphazenes where R
represents a variety of organic or organometallic
side
groups.
Although
polyphosphazenes
were
ARTICLE IN PRESS
CH2
C
CN
C
O
OR
n
Fig. 10. Structure of poly(alkyl cyano acrylate).
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
778


---

# Page 18
developed during late 1960s by Allcock et al. [87,88],
biodegradable polyphosphazenes were developed
only within the past two decades by the same
group. Biodegradable polyphosphazenes are quite
distinct from other biodegradable polymers due to
its unprecedented functionality, synthetic ﬂexibility
and adaptability for various applications.
The phosphorous nitrogen backbone is hydro-
lytically stable and forms the backbone of more
than
500
different
types
of
polyphosphazenes
synthesized so far [87]. However, the incorporation
of certain groups, such as amino acid esters,
glucosyl, glyceryl, glycolate, lactate and imidazole,
has been found to sensitize the polymer backbone to
hydrolysis.
The
most
extensively
investigated
route
for
polyphosphazene synthesize is based on the two-
step preparative protocol outlined in Scheme I. In
this method, a reactive macromolecular intermedi-
ate, poly(dichlorophosphazene) (Scheme I; 2) is ﬁrst
produced
by
the
ROP
of
the
cyclic
trimer,
hexachloro cyclotriphosphazene (Scheme I; 1). The
chlorine side units in this polymer are subsequently
replaced by any of a broad range of organic side
groups [87]. The ROP of 1 is now a well-developed
process. Another synthetic route developed for the
synthesis of polyphosphazenes with well-controlled
structure
is
the
living
cationic
polymerization
process. It involves a catalyzed condensation of
the monomer, (CH3)3Si–NQPCl3 (Scheme I; 3)
with a loss of (CH3)3SiCl. The living polymerization
can take place at room temperature and gives
polymers
with
controllable
chain
lengths
and
narrow molecular weight distribution. The ‘‘living’’
character of the polymerization process also allows
the preparation of phosphazene-based block co-
polymers.
The unique feature of the phosphorous-nitrogen
backbone of polyphosphazenes is its unusual ﬂex-
ibility. Therefore, the side groups play a curcial role
in determining the properties for these polymers.
This allows for the possibility of designing and
developing polymers with highly controlled proper-
ties
such
as
extent
of
crystallinity,
solubility,
appropriate thermal transitions and hydrophobi-
city/hydrophlicity. In the case of biodegradable
polyphosphazenes, the side groups control the rate
of degradation for the polymers. Thus, polymers
can be designed with appropriate degradation
proﬁle ranging from few hours to years by varying
the side group chemistry [40].
Among the different classes of degradable poly-
phosphazenes investigated, poly[(amino acid ester)
phosphazenes] have been met with the most success
in terms of potential biomedical applications. All of
the amino acid ester substituted polyphosphazenes
ARTICLE IN PRESS
N
P
R
n
R
R = Organic groups,
Organometallic groups
Fig. 11. General structure of polyphosphazene.
N
P
N
P
N
P
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl3P = NTMS
N
P
Cl
Cl
n
250° C
PCl5 , CH2Cl2
rt
RONa
RNH2
RONa
RNH2
N
P
NHR
NHR
n
N
P
OR
OR
n
N
P
OR
NHR
n
1
2
3
Scheme I. Synthesis of polyphosphazene.
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
779


---

# Page 19
were found to be degradable with the rate of
degradation varying with the type of amino acid
esters used. Among the amino acid esters investi-
gated, polyphosphazenes substituted with glycine
ethyl ester shows the fastest degradation [65,66].
Unlike polyesters, the amino acid ester polypho-
sphazenes undergo degradation to form neutral and
non-toxic products such as phosphates, ammonia
and the corresponding ester side groups. This
unique property of polyphosphazenes has been
recently utilized to form self-neutralizing blend
systems
by
combining
polyphosphazenes
with
poly(lactide-co-glycolide) [89]. Another unique fea-
ture of polyphosphazenes, is that they undergo both
surface and bulk erosion making the drug release
proﬁle from these matrices signiﬁcantly different
from other polymers. Although polyphosphazenes
have not been extensively investigated as drug
delivery vehicles, studies so far show the poten-
tial of biodegradable polyphosphazenes as drug
delivery vehicles due to their excellent biocompat-
ibility, unique functionality, matrix permeability
and the ability to control the rate and mode of
degradation [88].
The in vitro and in vivo biocompatibility of
biodegradable polyphosphazene have been exten-
sively investigated by Laurencin et al. [40,90–94].
Most of the amino acid ester polyphosphazenes
elicited minimal to mild tissue responses when
implanted subcutaniously in a rat model. Fig. 12
illustrates the histology showing a minimal tissue
response to two different types of amino acid ester
polyphosphazenes [90].
Many of the amino acid ester polyphosphazenes
have shown excellent osteocompatibility and have
been
investigated
as
matrices
for
bone
tissue
engineering [95]. Recently a polyphosphazene-self
setting calcium phosphate composite cement system
has been developed by taking advantages of the
favorable interactions between polyphosphazene
side
groups
and
calcium
phosphate
ceramics
[96–99]. Due to the ﬂexible backbone, most of the
amino acid ester polyphosphazenes are soft elasto-
meric polymers and have limitations to its use as a
biomaterial for load bearing applications.
3.12. Polyphosphoester
Polyphosphoesters form another interesting class
of phosphorus containing polymers developed as
biomaterials. Polyphosphoesters were developed in
1970s by Penczek and his colleagues [100]. The
unique property of the synthetic biodegradable
polyphosphoesters is their good biocompatibility
and
similarity
to
biomacromolecules,
such
as
nucleic acid.
The polyphosphoesters can be developed by a
variety of synthetic routes including ring opening,
poly
condensation
and
polyaddition
reactions.
Several other mechanisms have also been proposed
[100,101]. Fig. 13 shows the general structure of
polyphosphoester, where R and R’ can be varied to
develop polymers with a wide range of physico-
chemical properties as in the case of polypho-
sphazenes. The term polyphosphoesters is com-
monly
used
to
characterize
several
classes
of
polymers that have phosphoester bonds in their
backbone
including
polyphosphites
(Fig.
13,
R0 ¼ H), polyphosphonates (Fig. 13 R0 ¼ alkyl/aryl
group) and polyphosphates (Fig. 13 R0 ¼ aryloxy/
alkoxy group).
Polyphosphoesters degrade under physiological
conditions due to the hydrolytic and enzymatic
cleavage of the phosphate bonds in the backbone.
The ultimate breakdown products of these polymers
are phosphate, alcohol and diols. Varying either the
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 12. Micrographs showing rat subcutaneous tissue response to poly[(ethyl alanato)50(methyl phenoxy)50]phosphazene and poly(ethyl
alanato)50 (phenylphenoxy)50]phosphazene after 12 weeks of implantation. P—polymer; N—neutrophils; F—ﬁbrous tissue (  40).
Reprinted from Ref. [90] with permission from Wiley Interscience.
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
780


---

# Page 20
backbone or side chain organic components can
readily alter the physico-chemical properties of
these polymers. The pentavalency of the phosphor-
ous atoms, as in the case of polyphosphazenes,
allows for chemical linkages to be made between
drugs or protein molecules and the polymer back-
bone, thereby enabling the development of novel
polymer pro-drugs. Most of these polymers demon-
strate good in vitro cytocompatibility and good in
vivo tissue compatibility as evidenced by low ﬁbrous
tissue encapsulation of the implanted polymer.
The synthetic ﬂexibility of polyphosphoesters
allows
for
the
development
of
co-polymers
with other monomers, such as DL-lactide to form
poly(lactide-co-ethyl phosphate). The percentage of
DL-lactide in the co-polymer can be controlled by
varying the ratio between the monomers and the
propylene glycol initiator. This is done during the
synthesis of the lactide prepolymer prior to the
chain being extended by ethyl-phosphorodichlor-
idate [102]. The glass transition temperature of the
co-polymers was found to be inversely proportional
to the weight percentage of the phosphoester
segment. The co-polymers were also found to be
more hydrophilic due to the presence of ethylpho-
sphate groups in the backbone. These copolymers
show a two phase degradation proﬁle compared to
polylactide,
which
has
been
attributed
to
the
hydrolysis of the phosphates versus lactide func-
tional groups. The neutral co-polymer has been
investigated as a potential candidate for drug
delivery applications. Poly(lactide-co-ethyl phos-
phate) demonstrated a near zero-order release
proﬁle of chemotherapeautic drugs, such as pacli-
taxel. The sustained release formulation PACLI-
MERs microspheres contains 10% (w/w) paclitaxel
and has undergone Phase I human clinical trials for
the treatment of ovarian and lung cancer. Results
demonstrated the ability of this delivery system to
deliver chemotherapeutic agents in a sustained
manner, while maintaining appropriate biodegrada-
tion and biocompatibility. This polymer is also
currently under investigation as a scaffold for tissue
engineering applications.
Water-soluble cationic polyphosphoesters includ-
ing
polyphosphates
and
polyphosphoramidates
have been investigated as gene carriers [103]. These
polymers were found to bind plasmid DNA, form
complexes or nanoparticles and efﬁciently trasfect
many cell lines. The cytocompatibility of these
cationic polymers have also been demonstrated in
various
cell
cultures.
These
polymers
undergo
hydrolytic degradation at 37 1C due to the hydro-
lytic cleavage of the phosphoester bonds in the
backbone as well as the side chains. Due to the
chemical reactivity of the polymer, the conjugation
of speciﬁc ligands, endolysolytic elements or nuclear
localization signals to the polymer is possible to
enhance their transfectin efﬁciency. By incorporat-
ing cross-linkable moieties along the side chain of
water-soluble
polyphosphoesters
biodegradable
crosslinkable structures can be developed as inject-
able tissue engineering scaffolds [104].
4. Enzymatically degradable polymers as
biomaterials
4.1. Proteins and Poly(amino acids)
Proteins, the major structural components of
many tissues are essentially amino acid polymers
arranged in a three-dimensional folded structure
and are one of the most important class of
biomolecules identiﬁed. Being a major component
of the natural tissues, proteins and other amino
acid-derived polymers have been a preferred bio-
material for sutures, haemostatic agents, scaffolds
for tissue engineering and drug delivery vehicles.
Furthermore, protein based biomaterials are known
to under go naturally-controlled degradation pro-
cesses [105].
The human body is capable of synthesizing a wide
range of proteins in which the precursor molecules
pass
through
four
major
stages
in
becoming
functional proteins. The ﬁrst step involves the
formation of the primary structure where, a linear
sequence of various amino acids is held together by
peptide bonds. The constituent amino acids then
participate
in
hydrogen
bonding
to
form
the
secondary structure of protein. The linear primary
structure arranges itself in the most stable struc-
tures—an
a-helices
or
b-pleated
sheets.
These
secondary structures then join together to form
three-dimensional tertiary structures which in turn
interact with other protein chains to form the more
ARTICLE IN PRESS
P
O
R'
O
R
O
n
Fig. 13. Structure of polyphosphoesters.
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
781


---

# Page 21
reﬁned three-dimensional quaternary structure of a
multi-unit protein [106].
4.1.1. Collagen
Collagen is the most abundant protein present in
the human body being the major component of skin
and other musculoskeletal tissues. Collagen is a rod-
type polymer nearly 300 nm long with a molecular
weight of 300,000. There have been more than
twenty two different types of collagen identiﬁed so
far in the human body, with the most common
being Type I–IV. Type I collagen is the single most
abundant protein present in mammals and is the
most thoroughly studied protein. The Type I
collagen is composed of three polypeptide subunits
with similar amino acid compositions. Each poly-
peptide is composed of about 1050 amino acids,
containing approximately 33% glycine, 25% proline
and 25% hydroxyproline with a relative abundance
of lysine.
The subunit chains of collagen are synthesized
from free amino acids in the body and undergo
transcription, translation and post-translation mod-
iﬁcation processes in appropriate cells such as
ﬁbroblasts and osteoblasts. The primary structure
of these proteins is composed of repeating triplets of
(Glycine-X-Y)n, where X and Y are often proline
and hydroxyproline. The repeating sequence is
responsible for the helical structure and the inherent
and predictable mechanical strength of collagen
[107]. The glycine content accounts for the ﬂexibility
of the collagen chain—increased glycine gives rise to
more ﬂexibility. Ten of these polypeptide chains
form the a-chain of collagen which arranges to form
the right handed helical secondary structure. A left
handed, triple helical tertiary collagen structure is
formed from the arrangement of three secondary
structures. The smallest repeating units (glycine
molecules) have been found to cluster towards the
inside of the triple helix [108]. The procollagen
molecules are secreted into the extracellular space
where they spontaneously self-assemble to form
higher order structures, sometimes followed by
further modiﬁcations, such as cross-linking. The
formed ﬁbrils are oriented differently in different
types of tissues to give them the appropriate
mechanical strength.
Collagen undergoes enzymatic degradation with-
in the body via enzymes, such as collagenases and
metalloproteinases,
to
yield
the
corresponding
amino acids. Due to their enzymatic degradability,
unique physico-chemical, mechanical and biological
properties collagen has been extensively investigated
for biomedical applications. Collagen is mostly
soluble in acidic aqueous solutions and can be
processed into different forms such as sheets, tubes,
sponges, foams, nanoﬁbrous matrices, powders,
ﬂeeces, injectable viscous solutions and dispersions.
Studies have also shown that the degradation rate of
collagen used for biomedical applications can be
signiﬁcantly altered by enzymatic pre-treatment or
cross-linking using various cross-linking agents.
Collagen is one of the primary initiators of the
coagulation cascade and its high thrombogenicity
has led to its application as a haemostatic agent.
Several collagen-based hemostats are currently on
the market or undergoing clinical trials for multiple
surgical indications. Some of these include sealant
consisting of bovine collagen and bovine thrombin
(Sulzer-Spines Tech) used for cardiovascular and
spinal
surgical
procedures,
CoStasiss
Surgical
Hemostat which is composed of bovine microﬁ-
brillar collagen, bovine thrombin combined with
autologous plasma, and Floseals, a high viscosity
gel haemostatic agent composed of collagen-derived
particles and tropical bovine-derived thrombin.
Since collagen forms the major component of the
extracellular matrix and serves as a natural sub-
strate for cell attachment, proliferation and differ-
entiation, renewed interest in collagen as an ideal
matrix material for tissue engineering and wound
dressing application has occurred. Promograns, a
novel spongy collagen matrix containing oxidized
cellulose has been recently introduced in US and
European market for treating exuding diabetic and
ulcer wounds [109]. An FDA approved bilayer skin
substitute (Integras Dermal Regeneration Tem-
plate), currently in the market for full thickness or
deep partial thickness thermal injury, is composed
of a dermal layer of crosslinked bovine collagen and
glycosaminoglycan
and
an
epidermal
layer
of
polysiloxane [110,111]. Other FDA approved col-
lagen-based wound dressings are Biobranes and
Alloderms, which are, acellular collagen matrices
obtained
from
chemically
processed
human
cadavers. In addition to these acellular collagen-
based products, several bioengineered skin equiva-
lents
have
also
been
commercially
developed.
TransCytes consists of porcine, dermal collagen-
coated polymer substrates seeded with allogenic
human keratinocytes which deposit extracellular
matrix components. Orcels and Apligrafs are
other FDA approved collagen-based bilayer dres-
sings seeded with live human keratinocytes and
ARTICLE IN PRESS
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
782


---

# Page 22
ﬁbroblasts for the treatment of chronic ulcers. Other
collagen-based dressings have been recently re-
viewed by Purna and Babu [112].
Due to the high reactivity of collagen it can be
cross-linked by a variety of cross-linking agents
such as difunctional or multifunctional aldehydes,
carbodiimides, hexamethylene-diisocyanate, polye-
poxy compounds and succinimidyl ester polyethy-
lene glycol. Cross-linking can also occur by thermal
or high-energy irradiation, as well as by chemical
modiﬁcation, such as succinylated collagen to form
collagen gels for use as carriers for drug delivery and
as scaffolds for tissue engineering. Furthermore, the
extent of drug release from these collagen matrices
can be controlled by varying the physical properties
of the gel such as porosity, density and degradation
rate.
Collagen has been extensively investigated for the
localized delivery of low molecular weight drugs
including antibiotics. Several collagen-based genta-
micin delivery vehicles are currently on the market
world-wide (Sulmycins-Implant, Collatamps-G).
This delivery system shows a prolonged local
delivery of antibiotics with very low systemic
exposure. Recently, another prolonged antibiotic
collagen delivery system (Septocolls) has been
approved to prevent infection of collagen hemo-
static sponge by incorporating two gentamicin salts
having different solubilities [113]. Several composite
systems of collagen and synthetic polymers are also
currently
under
investigation
as
drug
delivery
devices [114].
Cross-linked absorbable collagen sponges are
also used as clinical trials as protein carrier vehicles.
Bioactive proteins, such as recombinant human
bone morphogenic protein (rhBMP-2), was incor-
porated in collagen matrices to achieve sustained
release of the protein due to favorable interactions
of the collagen matrix with the protein [115]. This
combination product is recently approved by the
US FDA to be used in conjunction with a titanium
interbody spine fusion cage for anterior lumbar
spinal fusion (InFUSEs Bone graft/LT-CAGEs
Lumbar Tapered Fusion Device) and is approved in
Europe (InductOss) for the treatment of acute tibia
fractures in adults.
In addition to its use as a protein delivery vehicle,
collagen has also been investigated for gene and
plasmid DNA delivery [116]. Due to the injectability
of a collagen matrix, collagen has been shown to retain
the gene vector/plasmid DNA and protect them from
immunological or enzymatic reactions of the body.
Absorbable collagen sponges, due to their ex-
cellent biocompatability, biodegradability and por-
ous structure have been extensively investigated as a
scaffolding material for accelerated tissue regenera-
tion. Duragens is a suture-free, three-dimensional-
collagen matrix graft developed for spinal dural
repair and regeneration is currently undergoing late
stage clinical trial [117].
Similarly, a composite of ﬁbrillar collagen, hydro-
xyapatite and tricalcium phosphate (Collagrafts)
has been FDA approved for use as a biodegradable
synthetic bone graft substitute. Several forms of
collagen are currently being investigated as scaffolds
for cardiovascular, musculoskeletal and nervous
tissue engineering [118].
The major sources of collagen currently used for
biomedical applications are bovine or porcine skin
or bovine or equine Achilles tendons. One dis-
advantage of these collagen-based biomaterials,
which is a limiting factor for the wide-spread
clinical application is their mild immunogenicity
imparted by the composition of the terminal region
and the antigenic sites in the central helix. The
immune response has been found to vary depending
on the species from which collagen has been
isolated, processing techniques and the site of
implantation. Other concerns include, the high cost
of pure collagen, variable physico-chemical and
degradation properties and the risk of infectious
diseases
transmission
due
to
the
allogenic
or
xenogenic origin of the material. Several recombi-
nant systems are currently under development to
produce human sequence collagen to overcome
some of the limitations of using animal-derived
collagen [119].
4.1.2. Natural poly(amino acids)
Natural poly(amino acids) are biodegradable
ionic polymers that differ from proteins in certain
aspects. Natural poly(amino acids), such as cyano-
phycin, poly(e-L-lysine) and poly-g-glutamic acid are
mainly composed of one type of amino acid. These
molecules exhibit polydispersity and in addition to
a-amide linkages, they exhibit other types of amide
linkages that involve b- and g-carboxylic groups as
well as e-amino groups [120]. Scheme II shows the
structure of cyanophycin, poly(e-L-lysine) and poly-
g-glutamic acid.
Poly-g-glutamic acid (g-PGA) is an anionic,
water-soluble biodegradable homo-polyamide pro-
duced by microbial fermentation and is composed
of D- and L-glutamic acid units connected by amide
ARTICLE IN PRESS
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
783


---

# Page 23
linkages between a-amino and g-carboxylic acid
groups.
This
biodegradable
polymer
was
ﬁrst
isolated in 1937 by autoclaving capsules of Bacillus
anthracis. [121]. Later, it was discovered that several
other Bacillus species were capable of secreting the
polymer into culture growth medium as well as
nematocysts of the eukaryotic organism Hydra
(Hydrozoa, Cnidaria). [122,123]. An investigation
of the polymer composition revealed it to be a co-
polymer with different proportions of enantiomeric
L- and D-glutamic acid [124].
Several modiﬁed forms of g-PGA has been
developed so far as drug delivery vehicles, tissue
engineering scaffolds and as thermosensitive poly-
mers. Poly(-g-glutamic acid) benzyl ester (g-PBG)
was developed by Kishida et al. as a carrier vehicle
for 5-ﬂuorouracil. This polymer degrades very
slowly in phosphate buffer solution (pH 7.4) and
shows a diffusion-controlled release pattern that is
pH dependent [125].
The high functionality of g-PGA makes it a
promising material for developing bioactive scaf-
folds for tissue engineering application. Matsusaki
et al. demonstrated the feasibility of developing
bioactive ﬁbroblast growth factor-2 coupled biode-
gradable substrates using poly(-g-glutamic acid)-
sulfonate (g-PGA-S) polymer. The modiﬁed poly-
mer has several advantages over natural sulfonated
polymers (e.g., heparin), such as the ability to
control the content of sulfonate group, low antic-
oagulant activity and the ability to enhance FGF-2
activity [126]. Thermosensitive polymers have been
known to exhibit unique changes in their hydration
properties following temperature changes and are
considered to be nano-engineered intelligent materi-
als for biomedical applications. Shimokuri et al.
[127], developed a thermosensitive polymer by
controlled propylation of poly(-g-glutamic acid).
Their studies showed that at appropriate levels of
propyl esteriﬁcation, the polymer could exhibit a
hydrophobic-hydrophilic balance suitable for ther-
mosensitivity.
Being a natural polymer, g-PGA is an ideal
biomaterial; however, due to its limited availability,
not many studies have been performed so far.
Similar to to g-PGA, poly L-lysine is of bacterial
origin and is currently being investigated as scaffold
material for tissue engineering and as drug delivery
vehicles due to its ability to form biocompatible
hydrogels [128]. Poly(L-lysine) is known to have
antibacterial, antiviral and antitumour activity and
is considered to be a potential candidate for
developing drug carrier vehicles. The cytotoxicity
of the polymer due to the very high positive charge
limits its applications however.
Cyanophycin, is a comb-like polypeptide isolated
from cyanobacteria that contains a-amino-a-car-
boxy-linked L-aspartic acid residues representing the
poly(a-L-aspartic acid) backbone and
L-arginine
residues bound to the b-carboxylic groups of
aspartic acids making it a highly polydisperse
polymer [129]. However, studies on the appli-
cations of cyanophycin as a biomaterial have been
limited.
4.1.3. Synthetic poly(amino acids)
4.1.3.1. Poly
(L-glutamic
acid). Poly(L-glutamic
acid) (L-PGA) is structurally different from gPGA
and is composed of naturally occurring L-glutamic
acid residues linked together through amide bonds.
Several synthetic routes have been investigated for
the synthesis of L-PGA; however, the triethylamine
initiated polymerization of the N-carboxyanhydride
(NCA) of g-benzyl-L-glutamate is the most widely
ARTICLE IN PRESS
N
NH
HO
NH
*
*
HN
*
O
O
O
n
H2N
NH2
N
O
*
n
*
N
H
HO
O
*
O
n
Scheme II. Structure of cyanophycin, poly((e-L-lysine), poly-g-glutamic acid.
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
784


---

# Page 24
used route [130]. Studies on developing a biosyn-
thetic route to form monodisperse L-PGA have also
been
performed
by
expressing
artiﬁcial
genes
encoding the polymer in bacterial strains [131]. In
addition, novel synthetic strategies for developing
L-PGA-based polymers with unique architectures,
such as star polymers and polymers with varying
compositions (e.g., di and multiblock polymers) are
being developed that could provide interesting
physical and biological properties [130]. Scheme
III shows the synthesis of L-PGA.
Poly(L-glutamic acid) has been found to be highly
susceptible to degradation by lysosomal enzymes.
The degradation product is monomeric L-glutamic
acid,
which
makes
them
ideal
candidates
as
biodegradable biomaterials. A biodistribution study
demonstrated that at a molecular weight of 11,000,
the polymer can be largely recovered in the kidneys
and urine with minimal retention in other tissues
[130]. Also, several in vivo studies have been
performed that demonstrate the good biocompat-
ibility and non-immunogenicity of L-PGA [130].
Poly L-glutamic acid has several unique properties
that make them attractive candidates as polymeric
biomaterials. The polymer is highly charged at
physiological pH and has been identiﬁed as a unique
gene/plasmid delivery vehicle. A recent study using
a rodent model has shown that sodium poly-L-
glutamate enhanced the expression of the reporter
gene SEAP up to eight-folds after an intra-muscular
injection when compared to the plasmid in saline.
Using quantitative PCR analysis of DNA extracted
from muscles at various time points, the authors
have shown that the amount of plasmid retained
was approximately three-fold higher for plasmid
formulated with poly-L-glutamate compared to
plasmids in saline after electrophoration-mediated
DNA delivery [132].
The a-carboxylate side chains of L-PGA are
highly reactive and can be chemically modiﬁed to
introduce various bioactive ligands or to modulate
the physical properties of the polymer.
L-PGA has also been extensively investigated
for developing polymeric drugs by conjugating
anticancer drugs to the polymer backbone. The
conjugation
has
been
shown
to
signiﬁcantly
increase the aqueous solubility, plasma distribution
time and tumor distribution of the drugs [130,133].
The high functionality of L-PGA also enabled
the development of biodegradable MRI contrast
agents [134].
Additionally, L-PGA has been investigated as an
attractive biodegradable biological adhesive and
hemostat, by chemically cross-linking gelatin [135].
L-PGA based adhesives demonstrated better soft
tissue binding and hemostatic properties compared
to ﬁbrin glue in studies using animal models.
Another promising bioadhesive is composed of
porcine collagen and L-PGA and has been found
to be superior to ﬁbrin glue in sealing air leakage
from the lungs [136].
4.1.3.2. Poly(aspartic
acid). Poly(aspartic
acid)
(PAA) is synthesized from aspartic acid by thermal
polymerization [137]. PAA is a highly water-soluble
ionic polymer with a carboxylate content much
higher that poly(glutamic acid). Fig. 14 shows the
structure of aspartic acid.
Polyaspartic acid has also been found to undergo
biodegradation by lysosomal enzymes. Several block
copolymers with aspartic acid and other synthetic
biodegradable polymeric moieties have been devel-
oped to form core forming micellar nanostructures
for use as smart drug delivery vehicles. Many of these
systems are currently undergoing late stage clinical
trials [138]. Due to the polymer’s high functionality,
ARTICLE IN PRESS
 
Scheme III. Synthesis of poly(L-glutamic acid).
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
785


---

# Page 25
several chemically modiﬁed forms of PAA are also
being considered as potential biomaterials. a,b-
poly(N-2-hydroxyethyl)-D,L aspartamide (PHEA) is
a synthetic water-soluble and biocompatible polymer
extensively investigated as a plasma expander. This
polymer was developed by simple aminolysis with an
ethanolamine of a polysuccinimide (PSI). This poly-
mer can also be converted into a hydrogel by high-
energy radiations and is currently being investigated
for various biomedical applications [139].
4.1.4. Elastin
Elastin is a major protein component of vascular
and lung tissue and is mainly responsible for the
unusual elastic properties of these tissues. Elastin is
a highly cross-linked insoluble polymer composed
of a number of covalently bonded tropoelastin
molecules. The tropoelastin molecules are produced
intracellularly by smooth muscle cells and ﬁbro-
blasts and are cross-linked extracellularly to form a
secondary structure with b-turns [140]. The tropoe-
lastin is composed of several repeating sequences of
the
pentapeptide
VPGVG,
the
hexapeptide
APGVGV, the nonapeptide VPGFGVGAG and
the tetrapeptide VPGG. Among these, the penta-
peptide VPGVG recurs up to 50 times in a single
molecule. In vivo biocompatibility studies have
shown that elastin elicit immune response to the
same extent as collagen implants. This property,
along with the insolubility of native elastin limits its
biomedical applications [140]. Elastin shows mini-
mal interaction with platelets and hence has been
evaluated
as
biological
coatings
for
synthetic
vascular grafts [141]. To overcome the limitation
of insolubility, synthetic elastin has been developed
from recombinant human tropoelastin [142]. The
tropoelastin solution can be transferred to appro-
priate molds and allowed to coaservate and cross-
link at 37 1C. The formed matrices were found to
have good mechanical and biological properties
making them promising elastic biomaterials for
appropriate applications [140].
Another
interesting
property
of
elastic
and
tropelastin is their ability to undergo folding when
the temperature is increased above 25 1C. This is due
to their transition from a disordered form to an
ordered form at higher temperature called inverse
temperature transition (ITT). Due to the unique
thermal transition properties of tropelastin and its
synthetic
analogs,
they
have
been
extensively
investigated as a smart, injectable drug delivery
systems [140].
4.1.5. Elastin-like peptides
Elastin-like
polypeptides
(ELP)
are
artiﬁcial
polypeptides composed of the pentapeptide repeats
(VPGXG) of human topoelastin except the fourth
amino acid. The X in ELP stands for a guest residue
that can be any amino acid except proline. The main
properties of ELP are derived from the naturally
occuring protein, elastin. ELPs have been found to
have excellent biocompatibility, non-immunogenic
properties and degradation products composed of
natural amino acids that are non-toxic. Similar to
topocollagen, ELPs also exhibit a reversible ITT.
ELPs can also respond to other stimuli such as pH,
ionic strength, and light by the incorporation of
appropriate guest residues in the molecule at the
fourth position [143]. Initially, the monomers,
oligomers and high polymers of these molecules
were chemically synthesized. However, with the
advancements in molecular biology these molecules
can
be
bioproduced
using
genetic
engineering
technique. ELPs can be recombinantly synthesized
as monodisperse polymers in E. coli by the over-
expression of a synthetic gene. Due to its inject-
ability and phase transition under mild conditions,
ELP has been extensively investigated as a drug
carrier vehicle [144]. ELPs are also currently being
investigated as potential biomaterials for cartilage
tissue engineering. The shear modulus of cross-
linked ELP was found to be similar to normal
cartilage and the dynamic shear modulus of the gel
increased from 0.28 to 1.7 kPa after seeding with
chondrocytes for 4 weeks in culture. This indicates
the feasibility of remodeling ELP matrices by the
deposition
of
functional
cartilage
extracellular
matrix components [145]. Also, due to the synthetic
versatility
of
ELP,
tailored
substrates
can
be
developed for engineering various tissues by incor-
porating speciﬁc cell binding epitopes in ELPs [146].
Thus, the incorporation of RGD peptide into an
ELP has signiﬁcantly enhanced cell adhesion and
spreading on ELP hydrogel matrices.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 14. Structure of poly(aspartic acid).
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
786


---

# Page 26
4.1.6. Albumin
Albumin is the most abundant protein in human
blood plasma accounting to almost 50% of total
plasma mass. Albumin is a water soluble-protein
with a molecular weight of 66 kDa. The primary
function of albumin is to carry hydrophobic fatty
acid
molecules
around
the
blood
stream
and
maintain
blood
pH.
The
preproalbumins
are
synthesized in the liver and undergo further proces-
sing before getting released into the circulatory
system. The composition of albumin is character-
ized by a low content of tryptophan and methionine
and a high content of cystine and charged amino
acids, such as aspartic and glutamic acids, lysine
and arginine. Studies have shown that almost all
tissues in human body have the ability to degrade
albumin, making it a highly preferred degradable
biopolymer for medical applications [147]. Due to
its solubility and the presence of functional groups
along the polymer chain, albumin can be easily
processed into various shapes and forms such as
membranes, microspheres, nanoﬁbers and nano-
spheres. Due to its excellent blood compatibility,
albumin has been extensively investigated as a
carrier vehicle for intravenous drug/gene delivery
[148]. Albumin has also been investigated as coating
materials for cardiovascular devices [149]. Albumin-
based surgical adhesives have also been approved by
the FDA for reapproximating the layers of large
vessels, such as aorta, femoral and carotid arteries
(CryoLife Inc.) and are composed of bovine serum
albumin, gelatin and glutaraldehyde.
4.1.7. Fibrin
Fibrin is a biopolymer similar to collagen that is
involved in the natural blood clotting process.
Fibrin is derived from ﬁbrinogen, which is a
360 kDa protein composed of three pairs of poly-
peptide chains. The structure can be divided into
three major sections consisting of a central domain
composed of ﬁbrinopeptide E with two pairs of
ﬁbrinopeptide A and B molecules and two terminal
domains of ﬁbrinopeptide D. In the presence of
the enzyme thrombin, spontaneous ﬁbrillogenesis
occurs due the cleavage of ﬁbrinopeptide A and B to
form a linear ﬁbril. These ﬁbrils undergo lateral
association to form ﬁbers of varying diameters
ranging from 10 to 200 nm depending on the
environmental conditions. The ﬁbrin clot, once
formed, can undergo degradation called ﬁbrinolysis
in the body initiated by a complex cascade of
enzymes present in the human body [150].
Fibrin is one of the earliest biopolymers used as
biomaterials. This is due to the excellent biocompat-
ibility, biodegradability, injectability and the pre-
sence of several extracellular matrix proteins, such
as ﬁbronectin, that favorably affects cell adhesion
and proliferation. One of the ﬁrst products devel-
oped from ﬁbrin was a ﬁbrin sealant. Various ﬁbrin
sealant products are being used clinically world-
wide for hemostasis and tissue sealing applications
in various surgical procedures. Due to its inject-
ability and biodegradability, ﬁbrin has also been
investigated
as
a
carrier
vehicle
for
bioactive
molecules. It has been found that proteins interact
differently with ﬁbrin clots, with certain growth
factors demonstrating a strong interaction with
ﬁbrin matrices [151]. Several cross-linking techni-
ques are also currently under investigation to
control the release proﬁle of bioactive molecules
from the ﬁbrin matrix. Fibrin matrices have also
been found to be excellent cell carrier vehicles.
Bioseeds is a ﬁbrin-based product obtained by
mixing keratinocytes with ﬁbrin and is used to treat
chronic wounds. A unique feature of ﬁbrin-based
cell carriers is that the matrix properties can be
optimized for each different cell type [152].
4.2. Polysaccharides
Polysaccharides are macromolecules formed from
many monosaccharide units joined together by
glycosidic linkages. Polysaccharides are gaining
renewed interest as biomaterials due to the growing
body of literature pointing to their unique biological
functions ranging from cell signaling to immune
recognition. This combined with new synthetic
routes currently available to modify polysaccharides
or synthesize oligosaccharide moieties, biodegrad-
ability and ability to fabricate appropriate struc-
tures, make them one of the most important and
extensively investigated natural biomaterials.
4.2.1. Polysaccharides of human origin
4.2.1.1. Hyaluronic acid. Hyaluronic acid (HA) was
ﬁrst isolated in 1934 from the vitreous humor of the
eye by Meyer and Palmer [153]. This biopolymer
has steadily raised interest as a unique biomaterial
since its discovery.
Hyaluronic acid is a member of the glycosami-
noglycan family, which are linear polysaccharides
consisting of alternating units of N-acetyl-D-gluco-
samine and glucuronic acid, and are found in
virtually every tissue in vertebrates. HA can be
ARTICLE IN PRESS
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
787


---

# Page 27
considered to be the largest glycosaminoglycan
having molecular weights up to several millions.
Unlike other members of the glycosaminoglycan
family
present
in
the
human
body,
such
as
chondroitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate, keratin sul-
fate and heparin sulfate, HA is not covalently bond
to proteins. HA is water-soluble and forms highly
viscous solutions with unique viscoelastic proper-
ties. HA can form three-dimensional structures in
solution with extensive intramolecular hydrogen
bonding. It has been reported to be present at high
concentrations in synovial ﬂuid and vitreous humor
and signiﬁcantly contributes to the viscoelastic
properties of these tissues. Furthermore, HA plays
an important structural role in a variety of tissues
including articular cartilage, the nucleus pulposus,
skin, the cervis, and the glycocalyx of endothelial
cells. Fig. 15 shows the structure of HA.
It has been reported that half of the body’s total
HA content is present in the skin and the half-life of
this polymer varies from a few minutes to weeks
depending upon the tissue type.
Studies have elucidated that within the cells, HA
is synthesized on the cytosal surface of the plasma
membrane under the direction of three glycosyl
transferases: hyaluronan synthase-1 (Has-1, Has-2
and Has-3 [154]. Among
these,
Has-2 is the
principal enzyme responsible for HA synthesis
during
embroyogenesis;
however,
speciﬁc
roles
played by Has1 and Has3 are not yet clear [155].
The traditional sources for HA isolations are
rooster combs and bovine vitreous humor. How-
ever, using bioprocess methods for HA synthesis is
gaining interest and several bacterial fermentation
processes are currently under development.
HA can undergo degradation within the body by
free radicals, such as nitric oxide and MMPs found
in the extracellular matrix, followed by endocytosis.
It can also undergo digestion by lysosomal enzymes
to form mono and disaccharides, which can be
further converted into ammonia, carbon dioxide
and water via the Krebs cycle [156].
In earlier studies, HA was considered to be a
passive structural component of connective tissues;
however, later studies revealed it to be actively
involved in many biological processes such as
modulating cell migration and differentiation dur-
ing embryogenesis, regulating extra cellular matrix
organization and metabolism, as well as playing
important roles in metastasis, wound healing and
inﬂammation [157].
Since HA is produced by cells during early wound
healing, this polymer has been extensively investi-
gated
for
wound
dressing
applications.
Other
unique properties of HA include its ability to
promote angiogenesis, to modulate wound site
inﬂammation by acting as a free radical scavenger,
and to be recognized by receptors on a variety of
cells associated with tissue repair [154]. Due to the
high functionality and charge density of HA, it can
be cross-linked by a variety of physical and chemical
methods [158]. Modiﬁed HA, such as esteriﬁed
derivatives like ethyl/benzyl esters (HYAFFs) and
cross-linked hyaluronic acid gels have been exten-
sively investigated for wound dressing application.
These chemical modiﬁcations have also been found
to signiﬁcantly reduce the degradation rate of the
polymer.
The benzyl esters (HYAFFs) undergo hydrolytic
degradation via ester bonds in the absence of
enzymatic activity with degradation times varying
from 1–2 weeks to 2–3 months, depending on the
degree of esteriﬁcation. The de-esteriﬁed polymers
are more hydrated and soluble and resemble native
HA [159,160].
HA also plays an important role in tissue repair
by promoting mesenchymal and epithelial cell
migration and differentiation, thereby enhancing
collagen deposition and angiogenesis. This prop-
erty, in addition to its immunoneutrality makes HA
an ideal biomaterial for tissue engineering and drug
delivery applications. Its aqueous solubility allows
HA to be fabricated into different types of porous
and three-dimensional structures for these applica-
tions. Thus a viscous formulation of HA containing
ﬁbroblast growth factor (OSSIGELs) is under-
going late stage clinical trial as a synthetic bone
graft to accelerate bone fracture healing. Similarly
HYAFFs 11 is currently been used as a carrier
vehicle for a variety of growth factors and morpho-
gens as well as bone marrow stromal cells. In a study
that compared HYAFFs 11 with an absorbable
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O
O
COOH
OH
O
HOH2C
NH
HO
O
HO
O
Fig. 15. Structure of HA.
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
788


---

# Page 28
collagen sponge as a carrier vehicle for osteoinduc-
tive protein, recombinant human bone morphoge-
netic protein-2 (rhBMP-2) revealed a better healing
response with HYAFFs11 carrier than collagen
[161].
HA-based
materials
have
also
replaced
collagen-based materials as injectable soft tissue
ﬁllers [162]. High molecular weight viscous HA
solutions (AMVISCs and AMVISCs PLUS) are
being used as a vitreous humor substitute as well as
to protect the sensitive eye tissue during cataract
extraction, corneal transplantation and glaucoma
surgery.
Viscous
HA
solutions
(SYNVISCs,
ORTHOVISCs) are clinically used as a synovial
ﬂuid substitute to relieve pain and improve join
mobility in osteoarthritis patients [163]. A recent
animal
study
demonstrated
the
advantages
of
exogenous HA in treating vascular diseases [164].
4.2.1.2. Chondroitin sulfate. Studies have shown
that an important phase of wound healing involves
the secretion of glycosaminoglycans by ﬁbroblast
cells to form a hydrophilic matrix suitable for
remodeling while healing. A recent study using rat
embryonic ﬁbroblast cells showed that the majority
of the glycosaminoglycan chains synthesized were
chondroitin sulfate, suggesting the signiﬁcance of
this natural polymer for use in biomedical applica-
tions [165]. Fig. 16 shows the structure of chon-
drotin sulfate.
Chondrotin sulfate is the major component of
aggrecan, the most abundant glycosaminoglycan
found in the proteoglycans of articular cartilage.
Studies have shown that CS can stimulate the
metabolic response of cartilage tissue and has anti-
inﬂammatory properties [166]. It is also involved in
intracellular signaling, cell recognition and the
connection of extracellular matrix components to
cell-surface glycoproteins [167].
Chondrotin sulfate consists of a repeating unit
formed by N-acetyl galactosamine (GalNAc) and
glucuronic acid (GlcA) modiﬁed by sulfation, where
the position of sulfation varies with the type of CS
[168]. In mammals chondroitin sulfate disaccharides
have been found to be monosulfated in the 4th or
6th position of the GalNAc residue or disulfated in
the 2nd and 6th position of the GlcA and GalNAc
or in the 4 and 6 positions of GalNAc residue [169].
The enzymes responsible for these modiﬁcations are
chondroitin sulfotransferases.
Due to its biocompatibility, non-immunogenicity
and pliability, CS hydrogels have been extensively
investigated for wound dressing applications [170].
Similar to HA, several physical and chemical
crosslinking techniques have been developed for
CS to form hydrogels for biomedical applications
[171]. Since CS plays an important role in regulating
the expression of the chondrocyte phenotype, it has
been
extensively
investigated
as
a
scaffolding
material for cartilage tissue engineering. This is
particularly important since studies have shown that
successful cartilage regeneration can be achieved
through the use of a tissue engineered implant, only
if the seeded cells undergo normal proliferation and
phenotype development within the biodegradable
scaffold together with the production of a new
cartilage-speciﬁc extracellular matrix. Several stu-
dies have investigated the efﬁcacy of using compo-
site
scaffolds
composed
of
CS
and
other
biopolymers, such as collagen or synthetic biode-
gradable polymers, as scaffolds for cartilage tissue
engineering. These studies have revealed a strong
correlation between the use of CS and the bioactiv-
ity of the seeded chondrocytes [172].
Other natural bioactive polysaccharides that are
being considered as potential biomaterials for various
biomedical applications include heparin sulfate, ker-
atin sulfate and dermatan sulfate (Scheme IV).
4.2.2. Polysaccharides of non-human origin
In addition to the glycosaminoglycans present in
the human body, other types of polysaccharide
molecules have also raised interest as biodegradable
polymeric biomaterials. The most important mem-
bers among this class are the cationic polymer
chitosan, which originates from crutacian skeletons,
and the anionic polymer alginic acid, derived from
brown algae, both of which have been used as drug
delivery vehicles [173]. One of the most extensively
investigated polyelectrolyte complexes for biomedi-
cal applications involve chitosan and alginic acid.
They are used as wound dressings and as drug as
well as cell delivery vehicles [174].
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O
O
COOH
OH
O
HOH2C
NH
-O3SO
O
HO
O
Fig. 16. Structure of chondroton sulfate.
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
789


---

# Page 29
4.2.2.1. Chitin and chitosan. Structurally chitosan is
a linear polysaccharide consisting of b (1-4) linked
D-glucosamine with randomly located N-acetyl-
glucosamine groups depending upon the degree of
deacetylation of the polymer. Chitosan is derived
from chitin which is a fully acetylated polymer and
forms the exoskeleton of arthropod. Fig. 17 shows
the structure of chitosan. Chitosan has been found
to be non-toxic after oral administration in humans
and is an FDA approved food additive.
Enzymes, such as chitosanase, lysozyme and
papain are known to degrade chitosan in vitro
[175]. The in vivo degradation of chitosan is
primarily due to lysozyme and takes place through
the hydrolysis of the acetylated residues. The rate of
degradation of chitosan inversely depends on the
degree
of
acetylation
and
crystallinity
of
the
polymer [176]. The highly deacetylated form ex-
hibits the lowest degradation rates and may last
several months in vivo. Apart from this, chemical
modiﬁcation of chitosan can signiﬁcantly affect its
solubility and degradation rate. In a study that
compared the in vivo degradation of 85% deacety-
lated chitosan with isobutyl substituted chitosan
(degree of substitution, approximately 40%) after
implantation in the muscle pouch of mice demon-
strated the faster degradation rate of substituted
chitosan [177]. The faster degradation rate has been
attributed to the deformation of strong hydrogen
bonds present in chitosan. Azab et al. investigated
the effect of cross-linking density on the in vivo
degradation of chitosan gels. Various concentra-
tions of glutaraldehyde were used to develop gels
having varying cross-linking densities. The degrada-
tion rates of the gels were investigated following
subcutaneous and intraperitoneal implantations in a
rat model. The gels with lower cross-linking density
(FDG) showed signiﬁcant weight loss after 14 days
of
implantation;
approximately
80%
(subcuta-
neous) and approximately 91% (intraperitoneal).
No signiﬁcant decrease in weight was observed for
highly cross-linked gels (SDG) after 14 days of
implantation [178]. The study clearly showed the
effect of cross-linking density and the site of
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O
O
HOOC
OH
O
HOH2C
NH
-O3SO
O
HO
O
B
A
O
O
COOH
OH
HO
O
-O3SOH2C
NH
O
C
O
COOH
OH
O
-O3SOH2C
NH
O
O
OH
O
Scheme IV. Structures of glycosaminoglycans: (A) dermatan
sulfate, (B) heparin sulfate and (C) keratin sulfate.
O
HN
O
O
OH
HO
O
NH
O
*
OH
O
HO
O
NH2
O
HO
OH
Chitin
a
Chitosan
b
n
x
y
Fig. 17. Structure of chitosan.
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
790


---

# Page 30
implantation on the in vivo degradation of chitosan-
based implants. In vivo, chitosan is also known to
elicite minimal foreign body reactions with little or
no
ﬁbrous
encapsulation
upon
implantation.
Fig. 18 shows the tissue responses to chitosan gels
(FDG and SDG) when compared to biodegradable
surgical
suture
Vicryls.
Chitosan
gels
elicited
very minimal inﬂammatory response compared to
Vicryls which showed a pronounced inﬂammatory
reaction [178].
Chitosan is soluble in weekly acidic solutions
resulting in the formation of a cationic polymer with
a high charge density and can therefore form
polyelectrolyte
complexes
with
wide
range
of
anionic polymers [179].
Chitosan has structural similarities with glycosa-
minoglycans and hyaluronic acid present in human
body and due to the presence of highly reactive
amino groups along the polymer backbone, chit-
osan
is
susceptible
to
chemical
or
biological
functionalization [180]. In fact, chitin and chitosan
have shown to have stimulatory properties on
macrophages, and chemoattractive properties on
neutrophils [181]. These properties, along with its
antibacterial, hemostatic properties give chitosan
enourmous potential as a natural polymer for
wound healing applications [182,183]. Furthermore,
in vivo hydrolysis of chitosan and its derivatives by
lysozyme gives rise to oligomers that activate the
macrophages. The degradation leads to the forma-
tion of N-acetylglucosamine which is a major
component of dermal tissues and its presence is
essential for scar-less tissue repair. Thus, chitosan
can potentially act as a wound healing accelerator
as well.
The strong positive charges on chitosan makes it
a very effective mucoadhesive as it can strongly
interact with the negatively charged mucous mem-
brane. Several chitosan-based bioadhesive drug/
vaccine delivery systems are currently under devel-
opment [184]. Due to is aqueous solubility chitosan
can be fabricated into various structures and forms,
such as gels, nanoﬁbers nanospheres, microspheres
and combined with its pH sensitivity, excellent
biocompatibility and biodegradability, makes chit-
osan a promising candidate for developing drug
delivery devices and as scaffolds for tissue engineer-
ing. Chitosan has the ability to condense DNA to
form complexes and extensive research has gone
into developing non-viral gene delivery vehicles
[185]. Studies are currently being performed to
evaluate the potential of using chitosan as a
scaffolding material for engineering various tissues
including cartilage, skin and bone [176].
Chitosan has the ability to act as a permeation
enhancer through its interaction with the cell
membrane resulting in a structural reorganization
of tight-junction associated proteins. This, along
with its mucoadhesive property, makes it a suitable
candidate for use in both oral and nasal vaccination
formulations. As such, several solution and micro-
sphere vaccine formulations based on chitosan have
been developed. Chitosan offers another advantage
by being able to form micro/nanosphere formula-
tions without the use of organic solvents, which
maintains the immunogenicity of the antigens [186].
The high chemical reactivity of chitosan, has also
led to several chitosan-drug conjugates for cancer
therapy [187].
Chitosan was also used to develop injectable
thermosensitive
carrier
material
for
biomedical
applications [188,189]. Studies have shown that in
the presence of certain phosphate salts, chitosan can
undergo a temperature-controlled phase transition.
Due to the mild gelling conditions, the hydrogel has
been found to be a potential delivery vehicles for
growth factors, small molecular weight drugs and
cells for localized therapy.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 18. Histological sections demonstrating minimal tissue response in the surrounding tissues: (A) SDG implant, (  100), (B) FDG
implant (  100) and (C) chronic foreign body reaction in the tissues surrounding surgical sutures (  200). Reprinted from Ref. [178] with
permission from Elsevier.
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
791


---

# Page 31
4.2.2.2. Alginic acid. Alginic acid present within the
cell walls and intercellular spaces of brown algae
and has a structural role in giving ﬂexibility and
strength to marine plants. Due to its non-toxicity,
alginate has been extensively used as a food additive
and a thickener in salad dressings and ice creams.
Alginate is a non-branched, binary copolymer of
(1-4) glycosidically linked b-D-mannuronic acid and
a-L-guluronic acid monomers. The composition of
alginate (the ratio of the two uronic acids and their
sequential arrangements) varies with the source.
Alginate is not a random copolymer, but instead, it
is a block copolymer composed of two uronic acid
with different block lengths and sequential arrange-
ment. Fig. 19 shows the structure of alginic acid.
Alginates are extracted from the algae using a base
solution and then reacted with acid to form alginic
acid. They are high molecular weight polymers
having molecular weights up to 500 kDa. Aqueous
solutions of alginates show non-Newtonian beha-
vior similar to other glycosaminoglycans discussed
earlier.
The high functionality of alginic acid makes it a
favorable biopolymeric material for use in biome-
dical applications. The high acid content allows,
alginic acid to undergo spontaneous and mild
gelling in the presence of divalent cations, such as
calcium ions. This mild gelling property allows the
encapsulation of various molecules or even cells
within alginate gels with minimal negative impact
[190]. Furthermore, the carboxylic acid groups of
alginic acid are highly reactive and can be appro-
priately modiﬁed for various applications. Fig. 20
shows various molded shapes made from aqueous
alginic acid solution in the presence of calcium
carbonate [191].
Even though alginates have been extensively
investigated as biomaterials,
one of the main
disadvantages of using alginate-based materials is
their inability to undergo enzymatic degradation by
mammals. Studies are currently underway to devel-
op degradable gels based on alginate. It has been
found that ionically cross-linked alginates dissolve
at neutral pH upon losing the divalent cross-linking
cations and leads to uncontrolled and typically slow
degradation in vivo. Developing alginate gels by
gamma irradiation has been reported to be another
elegant way for developing degradable alginate gels.
It has been found that irradiation of high molecular
weight alginate with doses below 8 Mrad cleave
M-G residues in the polymer leaving the G block.
The resulting polymers were found to degrade faster
in vivo and get cleared from the body faster making
it a potential scaffolding material for bone regen-
eration [192]. Another method to induce biodegra-
dation to alginate-based materials is by chemical
modiﬁcation,
which
involves
oxidation
of
the
polymer backbone by periodate. The resulting
hemiacetal ring change the urinate residue to an
open chain and creates a hydrolytically labile bond
and the rate of hydrolysis of the resulting polymer
depends on pH and temperature [193]. Since the
aldehyde groups are highly reactive they can be used
to form chemically cross-linked degradable gels for
cells or drug encapsulation.
Alginate has also been extensively investigated as
a drug delivery device where in the rate of drug
release can be varied by varying the drug polymer
interaction as well as by chemically immobilizing
the drug to the polymer back bone using the
reactive carboxylate groups. The encapsulation of
ARTICLE IN PRESS
O
O
O
HOOC
OH
OH
O HO
HOOC
OH
L - Guluronic acid
D - Mannuronic acid
n
m
Fig. 19. Structure of alginic acid.
Fig. 20. Various shapes developed from alginate via calcium
crosslinking. Reprinted from Ref. [191] with permission from
Elsevier.
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
792


---

# Page 32
proteins and bioactive factors within ionically cross-
linked alginate gels are known to greatly enhance
their efﬁciency and targetability and as a result,
extensive investigation has been undertaken to
develop protein delivery systems based on alginate
gels [194].
A disadvantage of using alginate-based gels,
apart from their poor degradability, is poor cell
adhesion on alginate gels. Recent studies; however,
have shown the feasibility of developing alginate
gels with good cell afﬁnity. The modiﬁcation of
alginate with bioactive molecules, such as cell
binding peptides is a versatile method for develop-
ing cell-binding hydrogels for use as scaffolds for
tissue engineering.
5. Conclusions
Most of the biodegradable materials currently on
the market are based on natural polymers such as
collagen and synthetic polymers such as poly(a-
esters). Advances in synthetic organic chemistry and
novel bioprocesses are enabling the development of
a wide range of novel polymeric materials as
candidates for developing transient implants and
drug delivery vehicles. The success of biodegradable
implants lies in our ability to custom design or
modify existing biomaterials to achieve appropriate
biocompatibility, degradation and physical proper-
ties to elicit favorable biological responses.
References
[1] Shalaby SW, Burg KJL, editors. Absorbable and biode-
gradable polymers (advances in polymeric materials). Boca
Raton: CRC press; 2003.
[2] Domb AJ, Wiseman DM, editors. Handbook of Biode-
gradable Polymers. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 1998.
[3] Piskin E. Biodegradable polymers as biomaterials. J
Biomat Sci Polym Ed 1995;6:775–95.
[4] Barbucci R, editor. Integrated biomaterial science. New
York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers; 2002.
[5] Williams DF. The Williams dictionary of biomaterials.
Liverpool: Liverpool University Press; 1999.
[6] Lloyd AW. Interfacial bioengineering to enhance surface
biocompatibility. Med Device Technol 2002;13:18–21.
[7] Vert M. Aliphatic polyesters: great degradable polymers
that cannot do everything. Biomacromolecules 2005;6:
538–46.
[8] Medical Device and Diagnositc Industry, 2005 /http://
www.devicelink.com/mddi/archive/05/05/024.htmlS.
[9] Katti DS, Lakshmi S, Langer R, Laurencin CT. Toxicity,
biodegradation and elimination of polyanhydrides. Adv
Drug Deliv Rev 2002;54:933–61.
[10] Li S. Hydrolytic degradation characteristics of aliphatic
polyesters derived from lactic and glycolic acids. J Biomed
Mater Res 1999;48:342–53.
[11] Okada M. Chemical synthesis of biodegradable polymers.
Prog Polym Sci 2002;27:87–133.
[12] Farng E, Sherman O. Meniscal repair devices: a clinical and
biomechanical literature review. J Arthrosc Relat Surg
2004;20:273–86.
[13] Edlund U, Albertsson AC. Polyesters based on diacid
monomers. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2003;55:585–609.
[14] Lofgren A, Albertsson AC, Dubois P, Herome R. Recent
advances in ring opening polymerization of lactones and
related compounds. J Macromol Sci Rev Macromol Chem
Phys 1995;C35:379–418.
[15] Middleton JC, Tipton AJ. Synthetic biodegradable poly-
mers as orthopedic devices. Biomaterials 2000;21:2335–46.
[16] Zinn M, Witholt B, Egli T. Occurrence, synthesis and
medical application of bacterial polyhydroxyalkanoate.
Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2001;53:5–21.
[17] Goepferich A. Polymer bulk erosion. Macromolecules
1997;30:2598–604.
[18] Tsuiji H. In: Doi Y, Steinbuchel A, editors. Biopolymers,
biology, chemistry, biotechnology applications, vol. 4:
Polyesters III, applications and commercial products.
Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH; 2002. p. 129–78.
[19] Gruber P, O’Brien M. In: Doi Y, Steinbuchel A, editors.
Biopolymers, biology, chemistry, biotechnology, applica-
tions, vol. 4: Polyesters III, applications and commercial
products. Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH; 2002. p.
235–50.
[20] Albertsson AC, Varma A. In: Doi Y, Steinbuchel A,
editors. Biopolymers, biology, chemistry, applications, vol.
4: Polyesters III, applications and commercial products.
Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH; 2002. p. 25–53.
[21] Albertsson AC, editor. Degradable aliphatic polyesters,
advances in polymer science, Vol. 157. Berlin Heidelberg,
Germany: Springer; 2002.
[22] Gunatillake P, Mayadunne R, Adhikari R. Recent devel-
opments in biodegradable synthetic polymers. Biotechnol
Ann Rev 2006;12:301–47.
[23] Terasaka S, Iwasaki Y, Shinya N, Uchida T. Fibrin glue
and polyglycolic Acid nonwoven fabric as a biocompatible
dural substitute. Neurosurgery 2006;58:134–9.
[24] Tormala P. Biodegradable self-reinforced composite mate-
rials: Manufacturing structure and mechanical properties.
Clin Mater 1992;10:29–34.
[25] Maurus PB, Kaeding CC. Bioabsorbable implant material
review. Oper Tech Sport Med 2004;12:158–60.
[26] Lu HH, Cooper JA, Manuel S, Freeman JW, Attawia MA,
Ko FK, et al. Anterior cruciate ligament regeneration using
braided biodegradable scaffolds: in vitro optimization
studies. Biomaterials 2005;26:4805–16.
[27] Cooper JA, Lu HH, Ko FK, Freeman JW, Laurencin CT.
Fiber-based tissue-engineered scaffold for ligament replace-
ment: design considerations and in vitro evaluation.
Biomaterials 2005;26(13):1523–32.
[28] Zilberman M, Nelson KD, Eberhart RC. Mechanical
properties and in vitro degradation of bioresorbable ﬁbers
and expandable ﬁber-based stents. J Biomed Mater Res B:
Appl Biomater 2005;74:792–9.
[29] Bergsma JE, Rozema FR, Bos RR, Boering G, de Bruijn
WC, Pennings AJ. In vivo degradation and biocompatibility
ARTICLE IN PRESS
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
793


---

# Page 33
study of in vitro pre-degraded as-polymerized polyactide
particles. Biomaterials 1995;16:267–74.
[30] Leinonen S, Suokas E, Veiranto M, Tormala P, Waris T,
Ashammakhi N. Healing power of bioadsorbable cipro-
ﬂoxacin-containing self reinforced poly(L/DL-lactide 70/30
bioactive glass 13 miniscrews in human cadaver bone. J
Cranifac Surg 2002;13:212–8.
[31] Miller RA, Brady JM, Cutright DE. Degradation rates of
oral resorbable implants (polylactates and polyglycolates:
rate modiﬁcation with changes in PLA/PGA copolymer
ratios. J Biomed Mater Res 1977;11:711–9.
[32] Middleton JC, Tipton AJ. Synthetic biodegradable poly-
mers as medical devices. Med Plast Biomater 1998.
[33] Tiainen J, Veiranto M, Suokas E, Tormala P, Waris T,
Ninkoviv M, et al. Bioabsorbable ciproﬂoxacin-containing
and plain self reinforced poly(lactide-polyglycolide 80/20
screws: pullout strength properties in human cadaver
parietal bones. J Craniofac Surg 2002;13:427–33.
[34] Lu Y, Chen SC. Micro and nano-fabrication of biodegrad-
able polymers for drug delivery. Adv Drug Deliv Rev
2004;56:1621–33.
[35] Kim TK, Yoon JJ, Lee DS, Park TG. Gas foamed open
porous biodegradable polymeric microspheres. Biomater-
ials 2006;27:152–9.
[36] Borden M, Attawia M, Khan Y, Laurencin CT. Tissue
engineered microsphere-based matrices for bone repair:
design and evaluation. Biomaterials 2002;23:551–9.
[37] Katti
DS,
Robinson
KW,
Ko
FK,
Laurencin
CT.
Bioresorbable nanoﬁber-based systems for wound healing
and drug delivery: optimization of fabrication parameters.
J Biomed Mater Res B: Appl Biomater 2004;70:286–96.
[38] Ueda H, Tabata Y. Polyhydroxyalkanonate derivatives in
current clinical applications and trials. Adv Drug Deliv Rev
2003;55:501–18.
[39] Prior TD, Grace DL, MacLean JB, Allen PW, Chapman
PG, Day A. Correction of hallux abductus valgus by
Mitchell’s
metatarsal
osteotomy:
comparing
standard
ﬁxation methods with absorbable polydioxanone pins.
Foot 1997;7:121–5.
[40] Nair LS, Laurencin CT. Polymers as biomaterials for tissue
engineering and controlled drug delivery. In: Lee K,
Kaplan D, editors. Tissue engineering I. Advances in
biochemical engineering/biotechnology. Berlin: Springer
Verlag Review Series; 2006. p. 47–90.
[41] Sinha VR, Bansal K, Kaushik K, Kumria R, Trehan A.
Poly-e-caprolactone microspheres and nanospheres: an
overview. Int J Pharm 2004;278:1–23.
[42] Chiari C, Koller U, Dorotka R, Eder C, Plasenzotti R,
Lang S, et al. A tissue engineering approach to meniscus
regeneration in a sheep model. Osteoarthrit Cartilage
2006;14:1056–65.
[43] Mondrinos MJ, Dembzynski R, Lu L, Byrapogu VKC,
Wootton DM, Lelkes PI, et al. Porogen-based solid
freeform fabrication of polycaprolactone—calcium phos-
phate
scaffolds
for
tissue
engineering.
Biomaterials
2006;27:4399–408.
[44] Zhang Z, Kuijer R, Bulstra SK, Grijpma DK, Feijen JF.
The
in
vivo
and
in
vitro
degradation
behavior
of
poly(trimethylene carbonate). Biomaterials 2006;27:1741–8.
[45] Shelton JR, Lando JB, Agostini DE. Synthesis and
characterization of poly(b-hydroxybutyrate. J Polym Sci
Polym Lett B 1971;9:173–8.
[46] Pouton CW, Akhtar S. Biosynthetic polyhydroxyalkano-
ates and their potential in drug delivery. Adv Drug Deliv
Rev 1996;18:133–62.
[47] Chen C, Dong L, Yu PHF. Characterization and properties
of biodegradable poly(hydroxyalkanoates) and 4,4-dihy-
droxydiphenylpropane blends: intermolecular hydrogen
bonds, miscibility and crystallization. Eur Polym J 2006;42:
2838–48.
[48] Scycher M. Scycher’s handbook of polyurethanes. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press; 1999.
[49] Storey
RF,
Wiggins
JS,
Puckett
AD.
Hydrolyzable
poly(ester-urethane) networks from L-lysine diisocyanate
and D,L-lactide/e-caprolactone homo and copolyester triols.
J Polym Sci A: Polym Chem 1994;32:2342–5.
[50] Zang JY, Beckman EJ, Piesco NP, Agrawal S. A new
peptide-based urethane polymer: synthesis, biodegradatio-
n,and potential to support cell growth in-vitro. Biomaterials
2000;21:1247–58.
[51] Zhang JY, Doll BA, Beckman EJ, Hollinger JO. Three-
dimensional biocompatible ascorbic acid-containing scaf-
fold for bone tissue engineering. Tissue Eng 2003;9:1143–57.
[52] Saad B, Hirt TD, Welti M, Uhlscgmid GK, Neuenschwan-
der P, Suter UW. Development of degradable polyesterur-
ethanes for medical applications: in vitro and in vivo
evaluations. J Biomed Mater Res 1997;36:65–74.
[53] Bonzani IC, Adhikari R, Houshyar S, Mayadunne R,
Gunatillake P, Stevens MM. Synthesis of two-component
injectable
polyurethanes
for
bone
tissue
engineering.
Biomaterials 2007;28:423–33.
[54] Priscilla AML, van Luyn MJA, Chiellini F, Brouwer LA,
Velthoen IW, Dijkstra PJ, et al. Biocompatibility and
degradation of aliphatic segmented poly(ester amide)s: in
vitro and in vivo evaluation. J Biomed Mater Res 2006;
76A:699–710.
[55] Heller J, Barr J, Ng SY, Abdellauoi KS, Gurny R.
Poly(ortho esters): synthesis, characterization, properties
and uses. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2002;54:1015–39.
[56] Heller J, Barr J. Poly(ortho esters)—from concept to
reality. Biomacromolecules 2004;5:1625–32.
[57] Heller J. Ocular delivery using poly(ortho esters). Adv
Drug Deliv Rev 2005;57:2053–62.
[58] Hill JW, Carothers HW. J Am Chem Soc 1932;54:5169.
[59] Leong KW, Brott BC, Langer R. Biodegradable polyanhy-
drides as drug carrier matrices. Characterization, degrada-
tion and release characteristics. J Biomed Mater Res
1985;19:941–55.
[60] Langer R, Chasin M. In: Langer R, Chasin M, editors.
Biodegradable polymers as drug delivery systems. New
York: Marcel Dekker; 1990. p. 43–70.
[61] Tamada J, Langer R. The development of polyanhydrides
for drug delivery applications. J Biomater Sci Polym Ed
1992;3:315–53.
[62] Akbari H, D’Emanuele A, Attwood D. Effect of geometry
on the erosion characteristics of polyanhydride matrixes.
Int J Pharm 1998;160:83–9.
[63] Gopferich A, Tessmar J. Polyanhydride degradation and
erosion. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2002;54:911–31.
[64] Shieh L, Tamada J, Tabata Y, Domb A, Langer R. Drug
release from a new family of biodegradable polyanhydrides.
J Contr Rel 1994;29:73.
[65] Laurencin CT, Gerhart T, Witschger P, Domb A, Rosen-
berg AE, Hanff P, et al. Bioerodible polyanhydrides for
ARTICLE IN PRESS
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
794


---

# Page 34
antibiotic drug delivery: in vivo osteomyelitis treatment in a
rat model system. J Orthop Res 1993;11:256–62.
[66] Laurencin CT, Norman ME, Elgenxy HM, El-Amin SF,
Allcock HR, Pucher SR, et al. Use of polyphosphazenes for
skeletal tissue regeneration. J Biomed Mater Res 1993;27:
963–73.
[67] Li LC, Deng J, Stephens D. Polyanhydride implant for
antibiotic delivery—from the bench to the clinic. Adv Drug
Deliv Rev 2002;54:963–86.
[68] Kumar N, Langer RS, Domb AJ. Polyanhydrides: an
overview. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2002;54:889–910.
[69] Jiang HL, Zhu KJ. Synthesis, characterization and in vitro
degradation of a new family of alternate poly(ester-
anhydrides) based on aliphatic and aromatic diacids.
Biomaterials 2001;22:211–8.
[70] Uhrich KE, Gupta A, Thomas TT, Laurencin C, Langer R.
Synthesis and characterization of degradable polyanhy-
drides. Macromolecule 1995;28:2148–93.
[71] Uhrich KE, Thomas TT, Laurencin CT, Langer R. In vitro
degradation characteristics of poly(anhydride-imide) con-
taining trimellitylimidoglycine. J Appl Polym Sci 1997;63:
1401–11.
[72] Attawia
MA,
Uhrich
KE,
Botchwey
E,
Langer
R,
Laurencin CT. In vitro bone biocompatibility of poly
(anhydride-co-imides)
containing
pyromellitylimidoala-
nine. J Orthopaedic Res 1996;14:445–54.
[73] Ibim SE, Uhrich KE, Attawia M, Shastri VR, El-Amin SF,
Bronson R, et al. Preliminary in vivo report on the
osteocompatibility of poly(anhydride-co-imides) evaluated
in a tibial model. J Biomed Mater Res 1998;43:374–9.
[75] Anseth KS, Svaldi DC, Laurencin CT, Langer R. Photo-
polymerisation of novel degradable networks for ortho-
paedic applications. In: Scranton A, Bowman C, Peiffer R,
editors. Photopolymerization. ACS Symposium series 673.
Washington,
DC:
American
Chemical
Society;
1997.
p. 189–202.
[76] Peter
SJ,
Miller
MJ,
Yaszemski
MJ,
Mikos
AG.
Poly(propylene fumarate). In: Domb AJ, Kost J, Wiseman
DM,
editors.
Handbook
of
biodegradable
polymers.
Amsterdam: Harwood Academic; 1997. p. 87–97.
[77] Temenoff JS, Mikos AG. Injectable biodegradable materi-
als for orthopedic tissue engineering. Biomaterials 2000;2:
2405–12.
[78] Ertel SI, Kohn J. Evaluation of a series of tyrosine-derived
polypolycarbonates for biomaterial applications. J Biomed
Mater Res 1994;28:919–30.
[79] James K, Levene H, Parsons JR, Kohn J. Small changes in
polymer chemistry has a large effect on the bone-implant
interface: evaluation of a series of degradable tyrosine-
derived polycarbonates in bone defects. Biomaterials 1999;
20:2203–12.
[80] Bourke SL, Kohn J. Polymers derived from the amino acid
L-tyrosine: polycarbonates, polyarylates and copolymers
with poly(ethylene glycol). Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2003;55:
447–66.
[81] Bourke SL, Kohn J, Dunn MG. Development of a novel
resorbable synthetic polymer ﬁber scaffold for anterior
cruciate ligament reconstruction. Tissue Eng 2004;10:33–52.
[82] Bailey
LO,
Becker
ML,
Stephens
JS,
Ga;;ant
ND,
Mahoney CM, Washburn NR, et al. Cellular response to
phase-separated blends of tyrosine-derived polycarbonates.
Biomed Mater Res A 2006;76:491–502.
[83] Hooper KA, Macon ND, Kohn J. Comparative histologi-
cal evaluation of new tyrosine-derived polymers and poly
(L-lactic acid) as a function of polymer degradation.
J Biomed Mater Res 1998;41:443–54.
[84] Chirila TV, Rakoczy PE, Garrett KL, Lou X, Constable IJ.
The use of synthetic polymers for delivery of therapeutic
antisense
oligodeoxynucleotides.
Biomaterials
2002;23:
321–42.
[85] Vauthier
C,
Dubernet
C,
Chauvierre
C,
Brigger
I,
Couvreur P. Drug delivery to resistant tumors: the
potential
of
poly
(alkyl
cyanoacrylate)
nanoparticles.
J Contr Rel 2003;93:151–60.
[86] Vauthier C, Dubernet C, Fattal E, Pinto-Alphandary H,
Couvreur P. Poly (alkylcyanoacrylates) as biodegradable
materials for biomedical applications. Adv Drug Del Rev
2003;55:519–48.
[87] Allcock HR. Chemistry and applications of polypho-
sphazenes. New York: Wiley; 2003.
[88] Lakshmi S, Katti DS, Laurencin CT. Biodegradable
polyphosphazenes for drug delivery applications. Adv
Drug Deliv Rev 2003;55:467–82.
[89] Ambrossio AM, Allcock HR, Katti DS, Laurencin CT.
Degradable
polyphosphazene/poly(alpha-hydroxyester)
blends: degradation studies. Biomaterials 2002;23:1667–72.
[90] Sethuraman S, Nair LS, El-Amin S, Farrar R, Nguyen MT,
Singh A, et al. In vivo biodegradability and biocompat-
ibility evaluation of novel alanine ester based polypho-
sphazenes in a rat model. J Biomed Mater Res A
2006;77:679–87.
[91] Nair LS, Lee D, Laurencin CT. Polyphosphazenes as
novel biomaterials. In: Narasimhan A, Mallapragada A,
editors. Handbook of biodegradable polymeric materials
and applications. American Scientiﬁc publication; 2004.
p. 277–306.
[92] Nair LS, Khan YM, Laurencin CT. Polyphosphazenes. In:
Hollinger H, editor. An introduction to biomaterials. Boca
Raton: CRC publications; 2006. p. 273–90.
[93] Laurencin CT, Nair LS. Polyphosphazene nanoﬁbers for
biomedical applications: preliminary studies. In: Guceri S,
Gogotsi
YG,
Kuznetsov
V,
editors.
Nanoengineered
nanoﬁbrous
materials.
NATO-ASI
proceedings.
Dor-
drecht: Kluwer; 2004. p. 281–300.
[94] Kumbar SG, Bhattacharyya S, Nukavarapu SP, Khan
YM, Nair LS, Laurencin CT. In vitro and in vivo
characterization of biodegradable poly (organo phospha-
zenes)
for
biomedical
applications.
J
Inorganic
and
Organometallic Chemistry 2006;16:365–85.
[95] Nair LS, Lee DA, Bender JD, Barrett EW, Greigh YE,
Brown PW, et al. Synthesis, characterization and osteo-
compatibility evaluations of novel alanine based polypho-
sphazenes. J Biomed Mater Res 2006;76A:206–13.
[96] Sethuramn S, Nair LS, Bender J, Singh A, Greish Y,
Brown PW, et al. Novel amino acid ester polypho-
sphazene—hydroxyapatite
composites
for
bone
tissue
engineering. In: Laurencin CT, Botchwey E, editors.
MRS symposium proceedings. Nanoscale materials science
in biology and medicine, vol. 845. 2005. p. 291–6.
[97] Greish YE, Bender JD, Lakshmi S, Brown PW, Allcock
HR,
Laurencin
CT.
Low
temperature
formation
of
hydroxyapatite-poly(alkyl hydroxyl benzoate) phosphazene
composites
for
biomedical
applications.
Biomaterials
2005;26:1–9.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
795


---

# Page 35
[98] Greish YE, Bender JD, Lakshmi S, Brown PW, Allcock
HR, Laurencin CT. Composite formation from hydro-
xyapatite with sodium and potassium salts of polypho-
sphazene. J Mater Sci Mater Med 2005;16:613–20.
[99] Greish YE, Bender JD, Lakshmi S, Brown PW, Allcock
HR, Laurencin CT. Formation of hydroxyapatite-poly[-
bis(calcium carboxylato henoxy)phosphazene] composites
at physiologic temperature. J Biomed Mater Res 2006;
77A:416–25.
[100] Penczek S, Pretula S, Kalyzynski K. Poly(alkylene phos-
phates): from synthetic models of biomacromolecules
and
biomembranes
toward
polymer-inorganic
hybrids
(mimicking biomineralization). Biomacromolecules 2005;6:
547–51.
[101] Penczek S, Pretula J, Kaluzynski K. Models of biomacro-
molecules
and
other useful
structures
based
on
the
poly(alkylene phosphate)chains. Poly J Chem 2001;75:
117–81.
[102] Zhao Z, Wang J, Mao H, Leong KW. Polyphosphoesters
in
drug
and
gene
delivery.
Adv
Drug
Deliv
Rev
2002;55:483–99.
[103] Wang J, Zhang PC, Mao HQ, Leong KW. Enhanced gene
expression in mouse muscle by systained release of plasmid
DNA using PPE-EA as a carrier. Gene Ther 2002;9:
1254–61.
[104] Li Q, Wang J, Shahani S, Sun SSN, Sharma B, Ekusseeff
JH, et al. Biodegradable and photocrosslinkable polypho-
sphoester hydrogel. Biomaterials 2006;27:1027–34.
[105] Meinel L, Hofmann S, Karageorgiou C, Kirker-Head C,
Cool Mc, et al. The inﬂammatory responses to silk ﬁbers in
vitro and in vivo. Biomaterials 2005;26:147–55.
[106] Haarer JC, Dee KC. Proteins and amino acid-derived
polymers. In: Guelcher SA, Hollinger JO, editors. An
introduction to biomaterials. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Taylor
and Francis; 2006. p. 121–38.
[107] Altman GH, Diaz F, Jakuba C, Calabro T, Horan RL,
et al. Silk based biomaterials. Biomaterials 2003;24:410–6.
[108] Gelse
K,
Poschl
E,
Aigner
T.
Collagens—structure,
function and biosynthesis. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2003;55:
1531–46.
[109] Vin F, Teot L, Measume S. The healing properties of
Promogran in venous leg ulcers. J Wound Care 2002;11:
335–7.
[110] Integra R. Dermal regeneration template. Product portfo-
lio. Integra life sciences, data on ﬁle 2003, /http://
www.integra-LS.comS.
[111] Thornton JF, Rohrich RJ. Dermal substitute (Integra) for
open nasal wounds. Plast Reconstruct Sur 2005;116:677.
[112] Purna Sai K, Babu M. Collagen based dressings—a review.
Burns 2000;26:54–62.
[113] Gruessner U, Clemens M, Pahlplatz PV, Sperling P, Witte
J, Sperling P, et al. Improvement of perineal wound healing
by local administration of gentamicin-impregnated col-
lagen ﬂeeces after abdominoperineal excision of rectal
cancer. Am J Surg 2001;182:502–9.
[114] Ruszczak Z, Mehrl R, Jeckle J, Stoltz M. Improved natural
polymer-based material for use in human and veterinary
medicine and method of manufacturing such 2000. Patent
application No. WO-01/66159.
[115] Geiger M, Li RH, Friess W. Collagen sponges for bone
regeneration with rhBMP-2. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2003;55:
1613–9.
[116] Sano A, Maeda M, Nagahara S, Ochiya T, Honma K, Itoh
H, et al. Atelocollagen for protein and gene delivery. Adv
Drug Deliv Rev 2003;55:1651–77.
[117] Narotham PK, Jose S, Nathoo N, Taylon C, Vora Y.
Collagen matrix (DuraGen) in dural repair: analysis of a
new modiﬁed technique. Spine 2004;29:2861–7.
[118] Duan X, McLaughlin C, Grifﬁth M, Sheardown H.
Biofunctionalization of collagen for improved biological
response: scaffolds for corneal tissue engineering. Bioma-
terial 2007;28:78–88.
[119] Olsen D, Yang C, Bodo M, Chang R, et al. Recombinant
collagen and gelatin for drug delivery. Adv Drug Deliv Rev
2003;55:1547–67.
[120] Obst
M,
Steinbuchel
A.
Microbial
degradation
of
Poly(amino acid)s. Biomacromolecules 2004;5:1166–76.
[121] Ivanovics G, Bruckner V. Chemische und immunologische
Studien uber den Mechanimus der Milzbrandinfektion and
Immunitat; die chemische Struktur der Kapdelsubstanz des
Milz brandbasillus und der serologisch identischen spezi-
ﬁschen Substanz des Bacillus mesentericus. Z Immunitats-
forsch 1937;90:304–18.
[122] Cheng A, Asada Y, Aaida T. Production of -g-glutamic
acid by Bacillus subtilis A35 under denitrifying conditions.
Agric Biol Chem 1989;53:2369–75.
[123] Kunioka M. Biosynthesis and chemical reactions of poly
(amino acids)s from microorganisms. Appl Microbiol
Biotechnol 1997;47:469–75.
[124] Shih I, Van Y. The production of poly-(g-glutamic acid)
from microorganisms and its various applications. Bior-
esource Technol 2001;79:207–25.
[125] Kishida A, Murakami K, Goto H, Akashi M, Kubota H,
Endo T. Polymer drugs and polymeric drugs X: slow
release of 5-ﬂuorouracil from biodegradable poly(g-gluta-
mic acid) and its benzyl ester matrixes. J Bioact Compat
Polym 1998;13:270–8.
[126] Matsusaki M, Serizawa T, Kishida A, Akashi M. Novel
functional biodegradable polymer. III. The construction of
poly(g-glutamic acid)-sulfonate hydrogel with ﬁbroblast
growth
factor-2
activity.
J
Biomed
Mater
Res
A
2005;73A:485–91.
[127] Shimokuri T, Kaneko T, Akashi M. Speciﬁc thermosensi-
tive volume change of biopolymer gels derived from
propylated poly(g-glutamate)s. J Polym Sci A: Polym
Chem 2004;42:4492–501.
[128] Yoshida T, Hiraki J, Nagasawa T. e-Poly-L-lysine. In:
Fahnestock SR, Steinbu¨ chel A, editors. Biopolymers, Vol.
7. Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH; 2003. p. 107–21.
[129] Simon R. Cyanophycin granules from the blue-green
alga Anabaena cylindrica: reserve material consisting of
copolymers of aspartic acid and arginine. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 1971;68:265–7.
[130] Li C. Poly(L-glutamic acid)—anticancer drug conjugates.
Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2002;54:695–713.
[131] Yu SM, Conticello VP, Zhang G, Kayser C, Fournier MG,
Mason TL, et al. Smectic ordering in solutions and ﬁlms of
a rod-like polymer owing to monodispersity of chain
length. Nature 1997;389:167–70.
[132] Nicol F, Wong M, MacLaughlin FC, Perrard J, Wilson E,
Nordstrom JL, et al.
L-glutamate, an anionic polymer,
enhances transgene expression for plasmids delivered by
intramuscular injection with in vivo electrophoration. Gene
Ther 2002;9:1351–8.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
796


---

# Page 36
[133] Singer JW, Vries PD, Bhatt R, Tulinsky J, Klein P, Li C,
et al. Conjugation of camptothecins to poly-(L-glutamic
acid). Ann New York Acad Sci 2000;922:136–50.
[134] Wen X, Jackson EF, Price RE, Kim EE, Wu Q, Wallace S,
et al. Synthesis and characterization of poly(L-glutamic
acid) gadolinium chelate: a new biodegradable MRI
contrast agent. Bioconjugate Chem 2004;15:1408–15.
[135] Otani Y, Tabata Y, Ikada Y. Hemostatic capability of
rapidly curable from gelatin, poly (L-glutamic acid) and
carbodiimide. Biomaterials 1998;19:2091–8.
[136] Sekine T, Nakamura T, Shimizu Y, Ueda H, Matsumoto
K, Takimoto Y, et al. A new type of surgical adhesive made
from porcine collagen and polyglutamic acid. J Biomed
Mater Res 2001;54:305–10.
[137] Joentgen W, Mu¨ ller N, Mitschker A, Schmidt H. Poly-
aspartic acids. In: Fahnestock SR, Steinbu¨ chel A, editors.
Biopolymers, vol. 7. Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH;
2003. p. 175–99.
[138] Matsumura Y, Hamaguchi T, Ura T, Muro K, Yamada Y,
Shimada Y, et al. Phase I clinical trial and pharmacokinetic
evaluation of NK911, micelle-encapsulated doxorubicin. Br
J Cancer 2004;91:1775–81.
[139] Pitarresi G, Saiano F, Cavallaro G, Mandracchia D,
Palumbo FS. A new biodegradable and biocompatible
hydrogel with polyaminoacid structure. Int J Pharm
2007;335:130–7.
[140] Mithieux SM, Rasko JEJ, Weiss AS. Synthetic elastin
hydrogels derived from massive elastic assemblies of self-
organized
human
protein
monomers.
Biomaterials
2004;25:4921–7.
[141] Woodhouse KA, Klement P, Chen V, Gorbet MB, Keeley
FW, et al. Investigation of recombinant human elastin
polypeptides as non-thrombogenic coatings. Biomaterials
2004;25:4543–53.
[142] McMillan RA, Conticello VP. Synthesis and characteriza-
tion of elastin-mimetic protein gels derived from a well-
deﬁned polypeptide precursor. Macromolecules 2000;33:
4809–21.
[143] Nath N, Chilkoti A. Interfacial phase transition of an
environmentally responsive elastin biopolymer adsorbed on
functionalized gold nanoparticles studied by colloidal
surface plasmon resonance. J Am Chem Soc 2001;123:
8197–202.
[144] Chilkoti A, Christensen T, Mackay JA. Stimulus respon-
sive elastin biopolymers: applications in medicine and
biotechnology. Curr Opin Chem Biol 2006;10:652–7.
[145] Betre H, Ong SR, Guilak F, Chilkoti A, Fermor B, Setton
LA.
Chondrocytic
differentiation
of
human
adipose-
derived adult stem cells in elastin-like polypeptide. Bioma-
terials 2006;27:91–9.
[146] Liu JC, Heilshorn SC, Tirrell DA. Comparative cell
response to artiﬁcial extracellular matrix proteins contain-
ing the RGD and CS5 cell-binding domains. Biomacro-
molecules 2004;5:497–504.
[147] Prinsen BH, de Sain-van der Velden MG. Albumin turn-
over: experimental approach and its application in health
and renal diseases. Clin Chim Acta 2004;347(1–2):1–14.
[148] Chuang VT, Kragh-Hansen U, Otagiri M. Pharmaceutical
strategies utilizing recombinant human serum albumin.
Pharm Res 2002;19(5):569–77.
[149] Uchida M, Ito A, Furukawa KS, Nakamura k, Onimura Y,
Oyane A, et al. Reduced platelet adhesion to titanium metal
coated with apatite, albumin–apatite composite, or lamini-
n–apatite composite. Biomaterials 2005;26:6924–31.
[150] Grassl E, Tranquillo RT. Fibrillar ﬁbrin gels. In: Ma XP,
Elisseeff J, editors. Scaffolds in tissue engineering. Boca
Raton: CRC, Taylor and Francis; 2006. p. 61–70.
[151] Wong C, Inman E, Spaethe R, Helgerson S. Fibrin-based
biomaterials to deliver human growth factors. Thromb
Haemost 2003;89:573.
[152] Mana M, Cole M, Cox S, Tawil B. The effect of ﬁbrinogen
and thrombin on human monocytes behavior and protein
expression on various formulations of ﬁbrin clot. Wound
Repair and Regeneration 2006, in press.
[153] Meyer IK, Palmer JW. The polysaccharides of the vitreous
humor. J Biol Chem 1934;107:629–34.
[154] Brekke JH, Thacker K. Hyaluronan as a biomaterial. In:
Guelcher SA, Hollinger JO, editors. An introduction to
biomaterials. Boco Raton: CRC, Taylor and Francis; 2006.
p. 219–48.
[155] Tammi
MI,
Day
AJ,
Turley
EA.
Hyaluronan
and
hemostasis: a balancing act. J Biol Chem 2002;277:4581–4.
[156] Al-Assaf S, Navaratnam S, Parsons BJ, Phillips GO. The
chain
scission
of
hyaluronan
by
peroxynitrite.
Arch
Biochem Biophys 2003;411:73–82.
[157] Weigel PH, Hascall VC, Tammii M. Hyaluronan synthases.
J Biol Chem 1997;272:13997–4000.
[158] Prestwich GD, Marecak DM, Marecek JF, Vercruysse KP,
Ziebell MR. Controlled chemical modiﬁcation of hyaluro-
nic acid: synthesis, applications, and biodegradation of
hydrazide derivatives. J Control Release 1998;53:93–103.
[159] Mori M, Yamaguchi M, Sumitoma S, Takai Y. Hyalur-
onan based biomaterials for tissue engineering. Acta
Histochem Cytochem 2004;37:1–5.
[160] Lepidi S, Grego F, Vindigni V, Zavan B, Tonello C, Deriu
GP, et al. Hyaluronan biodegradable scaffold for small-
caliber artery grafting: preliminary results in an animal
model. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 2006;32:411–7.
[161] Hunt DR, Joanovic SA, Wikesjo UME, Wozney JM,
Bernard DW. Hyaluronan supports recombinant human
bone morphogenetic protein-2 induced bone reconstruction
of advanced alveolar ridge defects in dogs. A pilot study.
J Periontol 2001;72:651–7.
[162] Eppley BL, Dadvand B. Injectable soft-tissue ﬁllers: clinical
overview. Plast Reconstr Surg 2006;118:98e–106e.
[163] Kato Y, Nakamura S, Nishimura M. Beneﬁcial actions of
hyaluronan (HA) on arthritic joints: effects of molecular
weight of HA on elasticity of cartilage matrix. Biorheology
2006;43:347–54.
[164] Volpi N. Therapeutic applications of glycosaminoglycans.
Curr Med Chem 2006;13:1799–810.
[165] Kosir MA, Quinn CCV, Wang W, Tromp G. Matrix
glycosaminoglycans in the growth phase of Fibroblasts:
more of the story in wound healing. J Surg Res 2000;92:
45–52.
[166] Chan PS, Caron JP, Rosa GJ, Orth MW. Glucosamine and
chondroitin sulfate regulate gene expression and synthesis
of nitric oxide and prostaglandin E(2) in articular cartilage
explants. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2005;13:387–94.
[167] Ayad S, Boot-Handford RP, Humphries MJ, Kadler KE,
Shuttleworth CA. The extracellular matrix-facts book. San
Diego, CA: Academic Press; 1994.
[168] Silbert JE, Sugumaran G. Biosynthesis of chondroitin/
dermatan sulfate. IUBMB Life 2002;54:177–86.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
797


---

# Page 37
[169] Sugahara K, Mikami T, Uyama T, Mizuguchi S, Nomura
K, Kitagawa H. Recent advances in the structural biology
of chondroitin sulfate and dermatan sulfate. Curr Opin
Struct Biol 2003;13:612–20.
[170] Gilbert ME, Kirker KR, Gray SD, Ward PD, Szakacs JG,
Prestwich GD, et al. Chondroitin sulfate hydrogel and
wound healing in rabbit maxillary sinus mucosa. Laryngo-
scope 2004;114(8):1406–9.
[171] Kirker KR, Luo Y, Nielson JH, Shelby J, Prestwich GD.
Glycosaminoglycan hydrogel ﬁlms as bio-interactive dres-
sings for wound healing. Biomaterials 2002;17:3661–71.
[172] van Susante JL, Pieper J, Buma P, van Kuppevelt TH,
Beuningen HV, van der Kraan PM, et al. Linkage of
chondroitin-sulfate to type I collagen scaffolds stimulates
the bioactivity of seeded chondrocytes in vitro. Biomater-
ials 2001;22:2359–69.
[173] Abraham DJ. Polyionic hydrocolloids for the intestinal
delivery of protein drugs: alginate and chitosan—a review.
J Control Release 2006;114(1):1–14.
[174] Baruch L, Machluf M. Alginate-chitosan complex coacer-
vation for cell encapsulation: effect on mechanical proper-
ties and on long-term viability. Biopolymers 2006;82:570–9.
[175] Nordtveit R J, Varum K M, Smidstrod O. Degradation of
partially N-acetylated chitosans with hen egg white and
human lysozyme. Carbohyd Polym 1996;29:163–7.
[176] Shi C, Zhu Y, Ran X, Wang M, Su Y, Cheng T.
Therapeutic potential of chitosan and its derivatives in
regenerative medicine. J Surg Res 2006;133:185–92.
[177] Li D, Liu L, Tian K, Liu J, Fan X. Synthesis, biodegrad-
ability and cytotoxicity of water soluble isobutylchitosan.
Carbohyd Polym 2007;67:40–5.
[178] Azab Ak, Orkin B, Doviner V, Nissan A, Klein M, Srebnik
M, et al. Crosslinked chitosan implants as potential
degradable devices for brachytherapy: In vitro and in vivo
analysis. J Control Release 2006;111:281–9.
[179] Khor E, Lim LY. Implantable applications of chitin and
chitosan. Biomaterials 2003;24:2339–49.
[180] Jayakumar R, New N, Tokura S, Tamura H. Sulfated
chitin and chitosan as novel biomaterials. International.
J Biol Macromolec 2007;40:175–81.
[181] Suh JKF, Matthew HWT. Application of chitosan-based
polysaccharide biomaterials in cartilage tissue engineering:
a review. Biomaterials 2000;21:2589–98.
[182] Stone CA, Wright H, Clarke T, Powell R, Devaraj VS.
Healing at skin graft donor sites dressed with chitosan. Br J
Plast Surg 2000;53:601–6.
[183] Burkatovskaya M, Tegos GP, Swietlik E, Demidova TN,
Castano AP, Hamblin MR. Use of chitosan bandage to
prevent fatal infections developing from highly contami-
nated wounds in mice. Biomaterials 2006;27:4157–64.
[184] Martinac
A,
Filipovi
J,
Voinovich
D,
Perissutti
B,
Franceschinis E. Development and bioadhesive properties
of chitosan-ethylcellulose microspheres for nasal delivery.
Int J Pharm 2005;291:69–77.
[185] Mao HQ, et al. Chitosan-DNA nanoparticles as gene
carriers: synthesis, characterization and transfection efﬁ-
ciency. J Control Release 2001;70:399.
[186] Illum L, Jabbal-Gill I, Hinchcliffe M, Fisher AN, Davis
MSS. Chitosan as a novel nasal delivery system for
vaccines. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2001;51:81–96.
[187] Onishi H, Takahashi H, Yoshiyasu M, Machida Y.
Preparation and in vitro properties of N-Succinylchitosan
or carboxymethylchitin-mitomycin C conjugate micropar-
ticles with speciﬁed size. Drug Dev Ind Pharm 2001;27:
659–67.
[188] Nair LS, Bijoux C, Trevor S, Laurencin CT. Development
of injectable thermogelling chitosan-inorganic phosphate
solution for biomedical application. Soc Biomater Meet
2006.
[189] Ruel-Garie0py E, Shive M, Bichara A, Berrad M, Garrec
DL, Chenite A, et al. A thermosensitive chitosan-based
hydrogel for the local delivery of paclitaxel. Eur J Pharm
Biopharm 2004;57:53–63.
[190] Klock G, Pfeffermann A, Ryser C, Grohn P, Kuttler B,
Hahn HJ, et al. Biocompatibility of mannuronic acid-rich
alginates. Biomaterials 1997;18:707–13.
[191] Kuo CK, Ma PX. Ionically crosslinked alginate hydrogels
as scafolds for tissue engineering: Part 1. Structure, gelation
rate and mechanical properties. Biomaterials 2001;22:
511–21.
[192] Simmons CA, Alsberg E, Hsiong S, Kim WJ, Mooney DJ.
Dual
growth
factor
delivery
and
controlled
scaffold
degradation enhance in vivo bone formation by trans-
planted
bone
marrow
stromal
cells.
Bone
2004;35:
562–9.
[193] Bouhadir KH, Lee KY, Alsberg E, Damm KL, Anderson
KW, Mooney DJ. Degradation of partially oxidized
alginate and its potential application for tissue engineering.
Biotechnol Prog 2001;17:945–50.
[194] Augst AD, Kong HJ, Mooney DJ. Alginate hydrogels as
biomaterials. Macromol Biosci 2006;6(8):623–33.
Further reading
[74] Burkoth AK, Anseth KS. A review of photocrosslinked
polyanhydrides:
in
situ
forming
degradable
networks.
Biomaterials 2000;21:2395–404.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
L.S. Nair, C.T. Laurencin / Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (2007) 762–798
798


---

